<!-- ## 搭建verilator仿真环境 -->

## Build a verilator simulation environment

<!-- verilator是一款开源的verilog仿真工具, 在"一生一芯"项目中,
你将会使用它来进行RTL功能仿真, 从而验证你编写的RTL代码.

框架代码默认提供了一个`npc`目录,
这里的`npc`是`New Processor Core`的含义, 将来大家就会在这个目录下设计自己的处理器.
不过为了设置一个环境变量`NPC_HOME`, 你需要运行如下命令:
> ```bash
> cd ysyx-workbench
> bash init.sh npc
> ```
这个环境变量会在将来使用.
`npc`目录下有一些简单的文件:
```
ysyx-workbench/npc
├── csrc
│   └── main.cpp
├── Makefile
└── vsrc
    └── example.v
```
目前这三个文件几乎都是空文件,
在这一小节中, 我们将会引导大家搭建verilator仿真环境,
并编写两个简单的数字电路模块来进行仿真. -->

verilator is an open source verilog simulation tool, in the "One Student One Chip" project, you will use it to carry out RTL functional simulation, so as to verify your RTL code.

The framework code provides an `npc` directory by default, where `npc` stands for `New Processor Core`, the directory where you will design your own processors. However, in order to set an environment variable `NPC_HOME`, you need to run the following command:
> ```bash
> cd ysyx-workbench
> bash init.sh npc
> ```
This environment variable will be used in the future. The `npc` directory contains a few simple files:
```
ysyx-workbench/npc
├── csrc
│   └── main.cpp
├── Makefile
└── vsrc
    └── example.v
```
Currently these three files are almost empty, in this chapter, we will guide you to set up the verilator simulation environment, and write two simple digital circuit modules for simulation.

<!-- > #### caution::竟然连仿真框架都没有, 真寒酸
> 我们之所以设置这部分的实验内容, 是为了让大家知道,
> <font color=red>项目里面的所有细节都是和大家有关系的</font>.
>
> 在以前的课程实验当中, 大家不多不少都会觉得,
> 框架理所应当是由助教来提供的, 做实验就是在指定的地方写上相应的代码,
> 其它都是无关的代码/文件, 大家不需要关心.
> 事实上, 这样的实验方案是<font color=red>很危险</font>的, 这不仅不能将你训练成真正的专业人士,
> 反而会使得你无法在真正的项目中存活下来:
> 1. 遇到系统性的bug, 肯定调不出来, 因为连调用你代码的模块你都觉得跟你没关系,
> 更别说可以清晰地认识到整个项目的架构和其中的每一处细节了
> 1. 离开了讲义, 就什么都做不了, 因为你总是在等别人像这些讲义一样清楚地告诉你接下来应该做什么怎么做,
> 而不是站在项目的角度去切实分析现在应该做什么
>
> 一个很现实的场景是, 以后你到了企业或者进入课题组, 不会再有讲义和框架代码照顾你,
> 你的老板说一句"来试试verilator", 你就要自己把verilator跑起来,
> 写一份使用报告, 在下周的组会上给老板汇报工作.
>
> 因此, 我们希望给大家提供更真实的训练: 给出一个目标,
> 让大家学会对目标进行分解, 并通过自身的技能一步步达成这个目标.
> 搭建verilator仿真框架其实是一个很容易实现的目标, 因此作为一项小试牛刀的训练, 也是非常合适的. -->

> #### caution::It doesn't even have a simulation frame. It's a shame.
> The reason why we set up this part of the experiment is to let you know that <font color=red>all the details of the project are relevant to you.</font>
>
> In the previous course labs, it was not uncommon for people to think that the framework was supposed to be provided by the TA, and that all you had to do was to write the code in the designated places, and that the rest of the code/files were extraneous, and that you didn't need to care about them. In fact, this kind of lab is <font color=red>very dangerous</font>, not only will it not train you to be a real professional, but it will also prevent you from surviving in a real project:
> 1. when you encounter a systematic bug, you will not be able to find it, because you will not even be able to understand the module that calls your code, not to mention you will not be able to clearly understand the whole project structure and every detail of it.
> 2. away from the handouts, you can not do anything, because you are always waiting for others like these handouts clearly tell you what to do next how to do, rather than stand in the project's point of view to actually analyze what should be done now!
>
> A very realistic scenario is, when you go to a company or join a project team, there will be no more handouts and framework code to take care of you, your boss will say "try verilator", you have to run verilator by yourself, write a report on how to use it, and present your work to your boss in next week's team meeting.
>
> Therefore, we want to provide you with a more realistic training: give you a goal, let you learn to break it down, and use your own skills to reach that goal step by step. Building a verilator simulation framework is a very achievable goal, so it's appropriate to use it as a training exercise to test the skills.

<!-- > #### hint::如果你想使用Chisel
> 请运行以下命令:
> ```bash
> cd ysyx-workbench
> bash init.sh npc-chisel
> ```
> 上述命令会将`npc`目录中的文件换成一个Chisel开发环境, 具体介绍可以阅读其中的`README.md`.
>
> 本小节主要关注verilator的使用方法, 即使你想用Chisel进行开发,
> 我们也建议你按照讲义内容使用verilog先走一遍流程. -->

> #### hint::If you want to use Chisel
> Please run the following command:
> ```bash
> cd ysyx-workbench
> bash init.sh npc-chisel
> ```
> The above command will replace the files in the `npc` directory with a Chisel development environment, as described in `README.md`.
>
> This chapter focuses on the use of verilator, even if you want to develop with Chisel, we recommend that you follow the handout and walk through the process using verilog.

<!-- ## STFW + RTFM -->

## STFW + RTFM

<!-- 事不宜迟, 我们马上开始. -->

Without further hesitation, let's get started.

<!-- > #### todo::认识verilator
> 你很可能是第一次听说过verilator这个工具, 这是很正常的.
> 然后你就会想进一步了解verilator的各种信息, 这也是很正常的.
> 但如果你的第一反应是去问人, 这就不恰当了.
> 事实上, verilator这个工具在仿真领域已经非常有名, 以至于你可以很容易在互联网上搜索到它的相关信息.
> 你需要通过STFW找到它的官方网站, 然后阅读一下相关的介绍.

找到官网并且阅读过相关介绍之后, 接下来就是通过运行来体会一下了.
不过在这之前, 我们还需要安装它. -->

> #### todo::Getting to know verilator
> You have probably heard of verilator for the first time, and that's normal. It's normal to want to learn more about verilator, and it's normal to want to know more about it. But if your first reaction is to ask someone, that's not appropriate. In fact, verilator is such a well-known tool in the simulation field that you can easily search for it on the Internet. You need to find the official website via STFW and read the introduction.

After finding the official website and reading about it, the next step is to run it. But before we can do that, we need to install it.

<!-- > #### todo::安装verilator
> 在官网中找到安装verilator的步骤, 然后按照从git安装的相应步骤进行操作.
> 我们之所以不采用`apt-get`安装, 是因为其版本较老.
> 此外, 为了统一版本, 你需要通过git安装`5.008`的版本.
> 为此, 你还需要进行一些简单的git操作, 如果你对此感到生疏, 你可能需要寻找一些git教程来学习.
> 另外, 你最好在`ysyx-workbench/`之外的目录进行这一操作,
> 否则git将会追踪到verilator的源代码, 从而占用不必要的磁盘空间.
>
> 安装成功后, 运行以下命令来检查安装是否成功，以及版本是否正确。
> ```bash
> verilator --version
> ``` -->

> #### todo::Installation of verilator
> Find the steps for installing verilator on the official website, and follow the steps for installing from git. The reason we don't use `apt-get` is because it is an older version. Also, in order to standardize the version, you need to install `5.008` from git. To do this, you'll also need to do some simple git work, and if you're not up to speed on this, you may want to look for some git tutorials to learn how to do this. It is also a good idea to do this in a directory other than `ysyx-workbench/`, otherwise git will track down verilator's source code and take up unnecessary disk space.
>
> After successful installation, run the following command to check if the installation was successful and if the version is correct.
> ```bash
> verilator --version
> ```

<!-- > #### todo::运行示例
> verilator手册中包含一个C++的示例, 你需要在手册中找到这个示例, 然后按照示例的步骤进行操作. -->

> #### todo::Run Samples
> The verilator manual contains a C++ sample, which you need to find in the manual and follow the steps of the setup process.

<!-- ## 示例: 双控开关 -->

## Example: Dual Control Switch

<!-- 手册中的示例非常简单, 甚至算不上是一个真正的电路模块.
接下来我们编写一个真正的电路模块, 双控开关, 来进行测试.
编写如下的verilog代码: -->
The example in the manual is so simple that it is not even a real circuit module. Let's write a real circuit module, a dual control switch, to test it. Write the following verilog code:
```verilog
module top(
  input a,
  input b,
  output f
);
  assign f = a ^ b;
endmodule
```
<!-- 双控开关的一个应用是通过两个开关(`a`和`b`)联合控制同一盏灯的亮灭(`f`).
和手册中的示例不同, 这个模块有输入输出端口.
为了驱动输入端口, 并从输出端口获得结果,
我们需要对C++文件中的`while`循环进行修改: -->
One application of the dual control switch is the joint control of the same light (`f`) by two switches (`a` and `b`). Unlike the example in the manual, this module has input and output ports. In order to drive the input ports and get the results from the output ports, we need to modify the `while` loop in the C++ file:
```c
// The following is pseudo-code

#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <assert.h>

while (???) {
  int a = rand() & 1;
  int b = rand() & 1;
  top->a = a;
  top->b = b;
  top->eval();
  printf("a = %d, b = %d, f = %d\n", a, b, top->f);
  assert(top->f == a ^ b);
}
```
<!-- 在一次循环中, 代码将会随机生成两个1比特信号, 用来驱动两个输入端口,
然后通过`eval()`函数更新电路的状态, 这样我们就可以读取输出端口的值并打印.
为了自动检查结果是否正确, 我们通过`assert()`语句对输出结果进行检查. -->
In a loop, the code will generate two random 1-bit signals to drive the two input ports, and then update the state of the circuit with the `eval()` function, so that we can read the value of the output port and print it. To automatically check that the result is correct, we check the output with an `assert()` statement.

<!-- > #### todo::对双控开关模块进行仿真
> 尝试在verilator中对双控开关模块进行仿真.
> 由于顶层模块名与手册中的示例有所不同, 你还需要对C++文件进行一些相应的修改.
> 此外, 这个项目没有指示仿真结束的语句, 为了退出仿真, 你需要键入`Ctrl+C`. -->
> #### todo::Simulation of a dual-control switch module
> Try to simulate the dual switch module in verilator. Since the top-level module name is different from the manual sample, you will need to make some changes to the C++ file accordingly. Also, this project does not have an end-of-simulation statement, so in order to exit the simulation, you need to type `Ctrl+C`.

<!-- > #### hint::上述代码是什么意思?
> 如果你不知道应该如何修改, 说明你还不太熟悉C程序的编写,
> 你应该先回到上一小节复习C语言. -->
> #### hint::What does the above code mean?
> If you don't know what to change, you're not familiar with C programming, and you should go back to the previous chapter to review the C language.


<!-- > #### todo::理解RTL仿真的行为
> 阅读verilator编译出的C++代码, 然后结合verilog代码, 尝试理解仿真器进行仿真的时候都发生了什么. -->
> #### todo::Understanding the behavior of RTL simulation
> Read the C++ code compiled by the verilator, and then, in conjunction with the verilog code, try to understand what happens when the simulator performs a simulation.

<!-- ## 打印并查看波形 -->
## Print and view waveforms

<!-- 查看波形文件是RTL调试的常用手段之一.
verilator支持波形的生成, 你可以通过开源的波形查看工具GTKWave来查看波形. -->
Viewing waveform files is one of the most common methods of RTL debugging. Verilator supports waveform generation, and you can view waveforms with the open source waveform viewer GTKWave.

<!-- > #### todo::生成波形并查看
> verilator手册中已经介绍了波形生成的方法, 你需要阅读手册找到相关内容,
> 然后按照手册中的步骤生成波形文件, 并通过
> ```bash
> apt-get install gtkwave
> ```
> 安装GTKWave来查看波形. -->
> #### todo::Generate and view waveforms
> The verilator manual already describes the method of waveform generation, you need to read the manual to find the relevant content, and then follow the steps in the manual to generate a waveform file, and run the following command:
> ```bash
> apt-get install gtkwave
> ```
> to install GTKWave to view waveforms.

<!-- > #### hint::手册这么多内容, 怎么找?
> 尝试一下键入`Ctrl+F`. -->
> #### hint::There's so much in the manual, how do I find it?
> Try typing `Ctrl+F`.

<!-- > #### danger::不要长时间生成波形
> 波形文件一般会占用较多的磁盘空间, 长时间生成波形可能会导致磁盘空间耗尽, 从而导致系统崩溃. -->
> #### danger::Do not generate waveforms for long periods of time
> Waveform files generally take up a lot of disk space, and generating waveforms for a long time may lead to running out of disk space, which may cause the system to crash.

<!-- ## 编写Makefile -->
## Write a makefile

<!-- > #### todo::一键仿真
> 反复键入编译运行的命令是很不方便的, 尝试为`npc/Makefile`编写规则`sim`,
> 实现一键仿真, 如键入`make sim`即可进行上述仿真. -->
> #### todo::One-Click Simulation
> It is inconvenient to type the compile command repeatedly, try to write a rule `sim` for `npc/Makefile` to achieve one-click simulation, e.g. type `make sim` to carry out the above simulation.

<!-- > #### danger::注意保留git追踪的命令
> 框架代码已经在`npc/Makefile`中提供了一条默认的`sim`规则,
> 它已经包含用于git追踪的命令`$(call git_commit, "sim RTL")`,
> 在编写Makefile的时候注意不要修改这一命令, 否则会影响开发跟踪的功能,
> 而这是记录"一生一芯"成果原创性的重要依据.
> 因此在编写Makefile并运行之后, 你也需要确认git是否已经正确追踪了仿真的记录. -->
> #### danger::Be careful to keep the git trace commands
> The framework code already provides a default `sim` rule in `npc/Makefile`, which already contains the command `$(call git_commit, "sim RTL")` for git tracking, be careful not to change this command when writing the Makefile, otherwise it will affect the development tracking functionality, which is the most important basis for documenting the originality of the `One Student One Chip` results. This is an important basis for documenting the originality of the "One Student One Chip" results. So after writing the Makefile and running it, you also need to make sure that git is tracking the simulation correctly.

<!-- ## 接入NVBoard -->
## Connecting to the nvboard

<!-- [NVBoard][nvboard](NJU Virtual Board)是南京大学开发的, 用于教学的虚拟FPGA板卡项目,
可以在RTL仿真环境中提供一个虚拟板卡的界面, 支持拨码开关, LED灯, VGA显示等功能,
在速度要求不高的场景下可完全替代真实的FPGA板卡(毕竟不是每人身边都有一块FPGA).
通过以下命令获取NVBoard的代码:
```bash
cd ysyx-workbench
bash init.sh nvboard
```

[nvboard]: https://github.com/NJU-ProjectN/nvboard.git -->
[NVBoard](https://github.com/NJU-ProjectN/nvboard.git)(NJU Virtual Board) is developed by Nanjing University, used to teach the virtual FPGA board project, it can provide a virtual board interface in the RTL simulation environment, support for dip switches, LED lights, VGA display and other functions, in the case of no perf requirement it can replace the real FPGA board (after all, not everyone around an FPGA on hand). Get the code of NVBoard by running the following commands.
```bash
cd ysyx-workbench
bash init.sh nvboard
```

<!-- > #### todo::运行NVBoard示例
> 阅读NVBoard项目的介绍, 尝试运行NVBoard项目中提供的示例. -->
> #### todo::Run the NVBoard example
> Read the introduction to the NVBoard project and try to run the examples provided in the NVBoard project.

<!-- > #### hint::不知道NVBoard如何工作?
> 试试从`make`命令开始, 看看一切是如何发生的.
> 通过前面的学习, 你已经掌握了足够的知识背景去理解NVBoard如何工作了:
> 包括Makefile的使用, C语言和C++中类的基本用法.
> 现在就试试阅读代码(Makefile也是代码), 看看示例中的verilog顶层端口,
> 约束文件, 以及NVBoard是如何建立联系的. -->

> #### hint::Not sure how NVBoard works?
> Try starting with the `make` command and see how it all works. You have enough background to understand how NVBoard works, including the use of Makefiles, and the basic use of classes in C and C++. Now try to read the code (Makefiles are also code) and see how the verilog top-level ports, constraints, and NVBoard are connected in the examples.

<!-- > #### todo::在NVBoard上实现双控开关
> 阅读NVBoard项目的说明, 然后仿照该示例下的C++文件和Makefile, 修改你的C++文件,
> 为双控开关的输入输出分配引脚, 并修改`npc/Makefile`使其接入NVBoard. -->
> #### todo::Dual control switching on NVBoard
> Read the description of the NVBoard project, modify your C++ file based off of the C++ sample and Makefile, assign pins to the inputs and outputs of the dual control switches, and modify the `npc/Makefile` to connect to NVBoard.

<!-- > #### comment::NVBoard的故事
> NVBoard虽然是南京大学的教学项目, 但它却与参加"一生一芯"的各位有着一种特殊的联系:
> 在第三期"一生一芯"的流片名单当中有两位特殊的同学, 他们报名的时候还只是大一,
> 而其中一位同学sjr就是NVBoard的第一作者.
>
> 事实上, 也正是sjr同学在参加"一生一芯"时锻炼出的独立解决问题的能力和自信,
> 帮助他成功开发NVBoard项目.
> 如今NVBoard项目又反过来帮助"一生一芯"改进学习效果,
> NVBoard承载的除了虚拟FPGA板卡的功能之外, 还有"一生一芯"秉承的独立解决问题的理念.
>
> 这些离你其实并不遥远, 当你愿意自主学习而不再等着别人给你答案的时候, 你的未来也会充满无限的可能. -->

> #### comment::The NVBoard Story
> Although NVBoard is a teaching program at Nanjing University, it has a special connection with the participants of "One Student One Chip": there are two special students in the third "One Student One Chip" flow list, they were only freshmen when they enrolled in the program, and one of them, sjr, is the first author of NVBoard.
>
> In fact, it was sjr's independent problem-solving skills and self-confidence that he developed during his participation in "One Student One Chip" helped him to successfully develop the NVBoard project. Now the NVBoard program is helping "One Student One Chip" to improve the learning outcomes. NVBoard carries not only the function of virtual FPGA boards, but also the independent problem solving concept that "One Student One Chip" upholds.
>
> These are not far away from you, when you are willing to learn on your own and no longer wait for others to give you the answer, your future will be full of unlimited possibilities.

<!-- ## 示例: 流水灯 -->
## Example: LED Blinking

<!-- 流水灯是按照顺序依次亮起和熄灭的一组灯, 以下是流水灯的一个参考实现: -->
(If that sample code is difficult to understand, you can do the [Digital Circuit Fundamentals lab](/docs/2306/prestudy/0.5.html) first!)

LED blinking is a group of LEDs that turn on and off sequentially, the following is a reference implementation of LED blinking.
```verilog
module light(
  input clk,
  input rst,
  output reg [15:0] led
);
  reg [31:0] count;
  always @(posedge clk) begin
    if (rst) begin led <= 1; count <= 0; end
    else begin
      if (count == 0) led <= {led[14:0], led[15]};
      count <= (count >= 5000000 ? 32'b0 : count + 1);
    end
  end
endmodule
```
Each bit of the output signal led corresponds to one led of the virtual FPGA board. Since the code contains sequential logic components that need to be reset, we need to modify the verilator's simulation code as follows:
```c
// The following is pseudo-code

void single_cycle() {
  top->clk = 0; top->eval();
  top->clk = 1; top->eval();
}

void reset(int n) {
  top->rst = 1;
  while (n -- > 0) single_cycle();
  top->rst = 0;
}

...
reset(10);  // Reset 10 cycles
while(???) {
  ...
  single_cycle();
  ...
}
```

<!-- > #### todo:: 将流水灯接入NVBoard
> 编写流水灯模块, 然后接入NVBoard并分配引脚.
> 如果你的实现正确, 你将看到灯从右端往左端依次亮起并熄灭. -->
> #### todo::Connecting LED blinking to the NVBoard
> Write a LED Blinking module, then connect it to the NVBoard and assign the pins. If your implementation is correct, you will see the lights turn on and off sequentially from the right end to the left end.

<!-- > #### todo::理解RTL仿真的行为(2)
> 阅读verilator编译出的C++代码, 然后结合verilog代码,
> 尝试理解仿真器是如何对时序逻辑电路进行仿真的. -->
> #### todo::Understanding the behavior of RTL simulation (2)
> Read the C++ code compiled by verilator, and then combine it with the verilog code to try to understand how the simulator simulates a sequential logic circuit.

<!-- > #### info::verilator进阶学习
> [请点击这里](https://www.itsembedded.com/) -->
> #### info::verilator advanced learning
> [Please click here](https://www.itsembedded.com/)
