<!-- ## 提交预学习答辩申请 -->
## Submission of pre-study defense application

<!-- > #### comment::如果你感受到了独立解决问题的快乐
> 恭喜你!
>
> 因为这不仅意味着你的能力得到了肉眼可见的提升,
> 更重要的是你的内心也在变强, 和之前相比没那么害怕解决未知问题了.
> 这种心态的转变是至关重要的, 因为接下来还有无数的未知困难等着你去解决 :) -->
> #### comment::If you feel the joy of independent problem solving
> Congratulations!
>
> Because not only does it mean that you're getting better at what you do,
> But more importantly, you're getting stronger inside, and you're less afraid of solving unknown problems than before.
> This change of mindset is crucial, because there are still a lot of unknowns waiting to be solved :)

<!-- > #### todo::补充读后感
> 我们在预学习的一开始请你仔细阅读[提问的智慧][how to ask]和[别像弱智一样提问][stop ask]这两篇文章,
> 并编写了不少于800字的读后感.
> 请你结合自己完成预学习的经历, 进一步补充完善这篇读后感,
> 谈谈自己是如何通过这两篇文章中提倡的方法独立解决问题的.

[how to ask]: https://github.com/ryanhanwu/How-To-Ask-Questions-The-Smart-Way/blob/master/README-zh_CN.md
[stop ask]: https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md -->
> #### todo::Improve your essay
> At the beginning of the prestudy we ask you to read the articles [how to ask](https://github.com/ryanhanwu/How-To-Ask-Questions-The-Smart-Way/blob/master/README-zh_CN.md) and [stop ask](https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md) carefully and prepare a report of at least 800 words after reading them.
> Please improve the essay with your own experience of completing the prestudy
> Tell us how you solved the problems independently by using the methods advocated in these articles.

<!-- > #### todo::完成所有必做题
> * Linux系统安装和基本使用习题
> * C语言习题
> * 数字电路习题
> * verilator接入NVBoard
> * PA1 -->

> #### todo::Complete all required exercises
> * Linux system installation and basic usage exercises
> * C language exercises
> * Digital circuit exercises
> * Verilator connects to NVBoard
> * PA1

<!-- > #### todo::提交入学答辩申请
> ##### 申请答辩
> * 填写 [第六期“一生一芯”--申请答辩](https://docs.qq.com/sheet/DT0ZPSGZNZk1FWVFS?tab=BB08J2&u=7e80683417974ca19ee2fd0fed634f56)进行申请后，扫描表内所附二维码加入答辩微信群等待助教发布答辩通知。答辩开始时间为周六上午九点半（通常一到两周一次）。
> ##### 答辩前准备
> * [通识问卷](https://www.wenjuan.pub/s/UZBZJv6ci37/#)通过（达到100分）并将截图附于答辩申请表中；将学习记录及读后感权限设为“所有人可查看”。
> * 设备检查：摄像头、麦克风。
> * 证件检查：需要准备身份证明证件（能证明本人身份，一般为学生卡、学生证、录取通知书、毕业证书、工牌、驾驶证等）。
> * 项目环境检查：能够运行预学习所需的代码。
> * **确保代码清晰，禁止手机录屏。**
> ##### 答辩流程
> 1. 答辩前，根据群内通知提前进入指定会议室等候；
> 2. 答辩过程中，打开摄像头，并对项目进行屏幕共享；
> 3. 答辩结束，若为首次答辩，答辩人念承诺书后离开会议。
> ##### 答辩后流程
> * 关注“一生一芯”公众号，答辩通过名单将于答辩后第一个周一下午六点前于该公众号公布。
> * 通过答辩的同学填写个人信息收集表以便寄送入学大礼包以及入学通知书。
> * **入学答辩未通过的同学，助教会给出学习建议，同学需在确认自己到达入学答辩要求后再次申请答辩。再次申请入学答辩的同学，助教会检查学习记录，若进度不满足入学答辩要求，助教可拒绝答辩。**
> ##### 最终解释权
> * 答辩结果的最终解释权归“一生一芯”项目组所有。 -->

> #### todo::Submit admission defense application
> ##### Apply for defense
> * Fill in [the sixth session of "One Student One Chip" - Application for Defense](https://docs.qq.com/sheet/DT0ZPSGZNZk1FWVFS?tab=BB08J2&u=7e80683417974ca19ee2fd0fed634f56). After applying, scan the QR code attached in the form to join the defense WeChat group and wait for the teaching assistant to release the defense notice. The defense starts at 9:30 am on Saturday (usually once every one to two weeks).
> ##### Preparation before defense
> * Pass the [general education questionnaire](https://www.wenjuan.pub/s/UZBZJv6ci37/#) (reach 100 points) and attach the screenshot to the defense application form. Set the permissions of the learning records and reading notes to "viewable by everyone".
> * Equipment check: camera, microphone.
> * Document inspection: You need to prepare identity documents (which can prove your identity, usually student card, student ID card, admission notice, graduation certificate, work license, driver's license, etc.).
> * Project environment check: Ability to run the code required for prestudy.
> * **Make sure the code is clear and prohibit cell phone screen recording.**
> ##### Defense process
> * Before the defense, enter the designated conference room in advance and wait according to the notice in the group.
> * During the defense process, turn on the camera and screen share the project.
> * At the end of the defense, if it is the first defense, the respondent will read the letter of commitment and leave the meeting.
> ##### Post-defense process
> * Pay attention to the "One Student One Chip" official account. The list of candidates who have passed the defense will be announced on the official account before 6:00 pm on the first Monday after the defense.
> * Students who pass the defense will fill in the personal information collection form in order to send the admission gift package and admission notice.
> * **For students who fail the entrance defense, the assistant will give study suggestions. Students need to apply for defense again after confirming that they meet the admission defense requirements. For students who apply for admission defense again, the teaching assistant will check their study records. If the progress does not meet the admission defense requirements, the teaching assistant may refuse the defense.**
> ##### Final interpretation
> The final interpretation right of the defense results belongs to the "One Student One Chip" project team.