
## First Exploration with GNU/Linux

Open `terminal`, you will see the following prompt:
```
username@hostname:~$
```

> #### hint::找不到终端?
> 如果你不知道如何打开`terminal`(终端), 你需要在互联网上搜索一些Ubuntu的使用教程来学习.

This prompt shows your username, host name, and the current working directory.
The username should be the same as you set during the installation.
The current working directory is `~` now.
As you switching to another directory, the prompt will change as well.
You are going to code under this environment, so try to make friends with terminal!

> #### question::Where is GUI?
> Many of you always use operating system with GUI, such as Windows.
> But the terminal is completely with CLI (Command Line Interface).
> Have you wondered if there is something that you can do it in CLI, but can not in GUI?
> Have no idea?
> If you are asked to count how many lines of code you have coded during the 程序设计基础 course, what will you do?
>
> If you stick to Visual Studio, you will never understand why `vim` is called 编辑器之神.
> If you stick to Windows, you will never know what is [Unix Philosophy][unix].
> If you stick to GUI, you can only do what it can; but in CLI, it can do what you want.
> One of the most important spirits of young people like you is to try new things to bade farewell to the past.
>
> GUI wins when you do something requires high definition displaying, such as watching movies.
> [Here][cli vs gui] is an article discussing the comparision between GUI and CLI.

[unix]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy
[cli vs gui]: http://www.computerhope.com/issues/ch000619.htm

Now you can see how much disk space Ubuntu occupies.
Type the following command:
```bash
df -h
```

To shut down the system, issue the following command:
```bash
poweroff
```

> #### comment::"command not found" in some Linux distributions
> In some Linux distributions, executing the command above may give an error message:
> ```
> -bash: poweroff: command not found
> ```
> This error is due to the property of the `poweroff` command -
> it is a system administration command.
> In such Linux distribution, executing this command requires superuser privilege.
>
> Therefore, to shut down the system, you should first switch to the root account:
> ```bash
> su -
> ```
> Enter the root password you set during the installation.
> Note that the password is not shown in the terminal to avoid password leaks.
> If the password is correct, you will see the prompt changes:
> ```bash
> root@hostname:/home/username#
> ```
> The last character is `#`, instead of `$` before you executing `su -`.
> `#` is the indicator of root account.
> Now execute `poweroff` command again, you will find that the command is executed successfully.

<!-- --->
> #### question::Why executing the "poweroff" command requires superuser privilege in some Linux distributions?
> Can you provide a scene where bad thing will happen
> if the `poweroff` command does not require superuser privilege?

<!-- --->
> #### danger::不要强制关闭虚拟机!!!
> 如果你使用虚拟机, 你务必通过`poweroff`命令或菜单关闭虚拟机.
> 如果你通过点击窗口右上角的`X`按钮强制关闭虚拟机, 可能会造成虚拟机中文件损坏.
> 往届有若干学长因此而影响了实验进度, 甚至由于损坏了实验相关的文件而影响了分数.
> 请大家引以为鉴, 不要贪图方便, 否则后果自负!
