<!-- # 设备和输入输出

你已经在NEMU和NPC上都实现TRM了, 下一步当然是让它们支持输入输出了. -->
# Devices and Input/Output

You've already implemented TRM on both NEMU and NPC. The next step, of course, is to make them support input/output.

<!-- > #### todo::在NEMU中实现输入输出
> 根据PA讲义完成PA2阶段3, 直到你看到如下提示框:
> > #### flag::温馨提示
> > PA2到此结束... -->
> #### todo::Implement input/output in NEMU
> Follow the PA lecture notes to complete Phase 3 of PA2 until you see the following prompt:
> > #### flag::Hint
> > PA2 ends here...

<!-- ## NPC中的输入输出

对于RISC-V架构, 输入输出是通过MMIO来实现的.
有了基于DPI-C的内存读写函数, 目前我们不必修改RTL代码就可以为NPC实现输入输出了!
我们只需要在这两个函数中对地址的范围进行简单的判断, 就可以将来自NPC的访存请求重定向到正确的设备了.
硬件上的MMIO是基于总线来实现的, 我们将来再实现真正的MMIO.

关于设备, 我们在这里不直接采用NEMU的设备模型, 而是为NPC在仿真环境中实现一套与将来流片SoC相近的设备模型.
实现总线后, 我们再来基于总线实现RTL版本的设备.
这时候, AM中IOE抽象的作用就体现出来了: NEMU和NPC的设备地址和设备模型都有所不同,
但经过抽象之后, 它们都可以运行同一份红白机模拟器的源代码,
更多地, AM上的所有程序都不必为不同的运行环境编写不同的代码. -->
## Input/Output in NPC

For the RISC-V architecture, input/output is implemented through MMIO.
With the memory access read and write functions based on DPI-C, we can now implement input/output in NPC without modifying the RTL code!
We just need to perform simple address range checks in these two functions to redirect memory access requests from NPC to the correct devices.
MMIO in hardware is implemented based on a bus, and we will implement true MMIO later.

Regarding devices, we are not directly using NEMU's device model here. Instead, we are implementing a device model for NPC in the simulation environment that resembles the future SoC for chip fabrication.
Once we implement the bus, we will then implement RTL versions of the devices based on the bus.
At this point, the role of IOE abstraction in the abstract machine (AM) becomes apparent: the device addresses and device models for NEMU and NPC are different, but after abstraction, they can both run the same Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) emulator source code.
Furthermore, all programs on the AM do not need to be written differently for different execution environments.

<!-- ## 在NPC中运行超级玛丽

大家已经完成了支持RV32IM和外设的NEMU, 并在NEMU上成功运行了超级玛丽.
同样, 我们也可以在RV32E的NPC上运行超级玛丽, 不过这首先需要实现串口和时钟.

我们知道RISC-V处理器通过MMIO访问外设, 例如在NEMU中串口会映射到`0xa00003f8`.
类似地, 我们也可以在NPC的仿真环境中实现简单的串口和时钟.
在上一节中提到, 我们通过DPI-C方式让NPC调用读写函数`pmem_read()`和`pmem_write()`来访问内存.
和NEMU一样, 我们可以在这两个函数中添加若干判断来实现MMIO的功能, 伪代码如下所示:
```c
extern "C" void pmem_read(int raddr, int *rdata) {
  // 总是读取地址为`raddr & ~0x3u`的4字节返回给`rdata`
  if (raddr == 时钟地址) { 返回当前时间 }
  ...
}
extern "C" void pmem_write(int waddr, int wdata, char wmask) {
  // 总是往地址为`waddr & ~0x3u`的4字节按写掩码`wmask`写入`wdata`
  // `wmask`中每比特表示`wdata`中1个字节的掩码,
  // 如`wmask = 0x3`代表只写入最低2个字节, 内存中的其它字节保持不变
  if (waddr == 串口地址) { putchar(...) }
  ...
}
```

在实现串口和时钟之后, 你可以运行相应的AM程序来测试,
并尝试在NPC上运行字符版本的超级玛丽. -->
## Running Super Mario in NPC

Now we have completed NEMU with support for RV32IM and peripherals, and successfully run Super Mario on NEMU. Similarly, we can also run Super Mario on NPC with RV32E, but this first requires implementing UART and a clock.

We know that RISC-V processors access peripherals through MMIO. For example, in NEMU, the UART is mapped to `0xa00003f8`. 
Similarly, we can implement simple UART and a clock in NPC's simulation environment. 
As mentioned in the previous section, we use DPI-C to allow NPC to call read and write functions `pmem_read()` and `pmem_write()` to access memory. 
Similar to NEMU, we can add several checks in these two functions to implement MMIO functionality. Pseudocode is shown below:

```c
extern "C" void pmem_read(int raddr, int *rdata) {
  // Always read 4 bytes from address `raddr & ~0x3u` and return to `rdata`
  if (raddr == clock_address) { return current_time; }
  ...
}

extern "C" void pmem_write(int waddr, int wdata, char wmask) {
  // Always write to address `waddr & ~0x3u` according to write mask `wmask`
  // Each bit in `wmask` represents a byte in `wdata`,
  // For example, `wmask = 0x3` means only write the lowest 2 bytes, leaving other bytes in memory unchanged.
  if (waddr == uart_address) { putchar(...); }
  ...
}
```

After implementing the UART and clock, you can run the corresponding AM programs for testing and try running the character version of Super Mario on NPC.

<!-- > #### todo::为NPC添加串口和时钟
> * 在NPC仿真环境中实现串口的输出功能, 并运行hello程序.
> * 在NPC仿真环境中实现时钟, 并运行`am-tests`的`real-time clock test`测试.
>   可以基于系统时间来实现时钟的功能, 在C语言中与系统时间相关的库是什么,
>   以及如何获取系统时间, 就交给你来STFW了.
> * 运行字符版本的红白机模拟器.

若你有兴趣还可以仿照NEMU实现VGA, 并在NPC上运行图形版本的超级玛丽. -->
> #### todo::Add UART and Clock to NPC
> * Implement UART output functionality in NPC's simulation environment and run the hello program.
> * Implement a clock in NPC's simulation environment and run the `real-time clock test` from `am-tests`. You can implement the clock functionality based on system time. 
> As for the C libraries related to systemS time and how to retrieve system time, we leave it to you to STFW.
> * Run the character version of the NES emulator.

If you're interested, you can also mimic NEMU's VGA implementation and run the graphical version of Super Mario on NPC.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### option::运行图形版本的超级玛丽
> * 在NPC仿真环境中实现VGA外设, 运行video测试.
> * 运行图形版本的红白机模拟器. -->
> #### option::Run the graphical version of Super Mario
> * Implement VGA peripheral in NPC's simulation environment and run the video test.
> * Run the graphical version of the NES emulator.
