<!-- # E1 C语言程序设计 -->
# E1 C language programming
<!-- C语言几乎是开发系统软件的不二选择,
而且考虑到参加"一生一芯"的不少同学就读的是非计算机专业,
C语言对大家来说学习的门槛也比较低.
大家需要掌握如下内容: 递归, 指针, 链表,
并且能够独立写出正确的程序(而不是在百度上搜一个所谓的示例代码). -->

C is the language of choice for developing system software, and considering that many of the students participating in "One Student One Chip" project majored in non-computer science, the learning curve for C is relatively simple. You need to know the following: recursion, pointers, linked lists, and be able to write a correct program on your own (not by searching for a so-called sample code on Google).



<!-- > #### todo::通过线上网站学习C语言 -->
<!-- > 你之前应该已经使用过[Compiler Explorer][compiler explorer]这个在线网站来运行C程序了,
> 现在你将要系统地学习C语言程序设计, 并通过这个在线网站来完成一些编程作业.
>
> 具体地, 你需要学习[Linux C编程一站式学习][linux c]中的
> 第1~9章, 第11~16章, 第21章, 第23~25章, 以及第26章第1节(即"链表").
> 你需要完成所有习题, 并在Compiler Explorer中测试你的程序是否正确.
>
> 此外, 你需要在正确运行程序之后, 把相应的程序代码保存到本地,
> 一方面可以把这些程序作为你的作业保留下来,
> 另一方面, 后面在安装Linux后, 我们会要求你再次运行其中的一些代码.
>
> 如果你对自己的C语言水平很有自信, 能够在不参考其他代码的情况下,
> 能独立编写一个链表程序并调试正确, 你可以跳过这部分学习.
> 如果你没有完整学习过C语言程序设计, 或者已经遗忘得差不多, 我们非常不建议你跳过这部分学习. -->

> #### todo::Learn C language through online websites
> You should have already used the [Compiler Explorer][compiler explorer] online website to run C programs. 
> Now you will systematically learn C language programming and complete some programming assignments through this online website.
>
> Specifically, you need to learn [One-stop Learning for Linux C Programming][linux c]
> Chapters 1-9, Chapters 11-16, Chapter 21, Chapters 23-25, and Chapter 26, Section 1 (i.e., ‘Linked Lists’).
> You need to complete all the exercises and test your programs in Compiler Explorer to  see if it is correct.
>
> In addition, after running the program correctly, you need to save the corresponding program code locally.
> On the one hand, you can keep these programs as your assignments.
> On the other hand, after installing Linux, we will ask you to run some of the code again.
>
> If you are confident in your C language skills and can independently write a linked list program and debug it correctly without referring to other code,
> you can skip this part of the course.
> If you have not fully learned C language programming, or have forgotten most of it, we strongly advise you not to skip this part of the course.


<!-- >   真正的C语言之父是这本书的作者[Dennis M. Ritchie][ritchie], 而不是谭浩强 -->
<!-- > #### info::另外推荐一些C语言学习资料 -->
> #### info::More recommended materials for learning C
> * [The C programming language (2nd Edition)][c]:
> The true creator of the C language is [Dennis M. Ritchie][ritchie], the author of this book, not Tan Haoqiang.
> * [C Coding Standard][c coding standard]
> * [SEI CERT C Coding Standard][cert c]
> * [Learn C the hard way][learn c]
<!-- lcthw网址有版权问题，与余博再商量 -->

[compiler explorer]: https://godbolt.org/
[linux c]: http://akaedu.github.io/book/
[c]: https://www.emgywomenscollege.ac.in/templateEditor/kcfinder/upload/files/C_Programming.pdf
[c coding standard]: https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~eno/coding/CCodingStandard.html
[cert c]: https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/display/c/SEI+CERT+C+Coding+Standard
[ritchie]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis_Ritchie
[learn c]: https://wizardforcel.gitbooks.io/lcthw/content/preface.html
