<!-- # E6 完成PA1 -->
# E6 Complete PA1
<!-- 南京大学"计算机系统基础"课程实验PA是国内首个也是目前唯一一个模拟器教学实验,
它将会指导大家开发一个功能完备但又经过简化的模拟器NEMU,
并基于NEMU来搭建一个完整的计算机系统, 这个目标和"一生一芯"非常类似.
你已经实现了minirvEMU, 并在上面运行了一些简单的程序;
而NEMU的核心工作原理和minirvEMU是一样的, 只不过NEMU支持的功能更丰富. -->

The ‘Computer Systems Fundamentals’ course experiment PA at Nanjing University features the first and currently only simulator-based teaching experiment in China. This experiment will guide students in developing a fully functional yet simplified simulator called NEMU, and then using NEMU to build a complete computer system. This objective is very similar to the ‘One Student One Chip’ initiative. You have already implemented minirvEMU and run some simple programs on it; the core working principles of NEMU are the same as those of minirvEMU, but NEMU supports more features.

<!-- 我们将PA引入到"一生一芯"中, 主要有以下考虑: -->
We introduced PA into "One Student One Chip" for the following reasons:
<!-- * PA承担了系统能力培养的绝大部分任务:
  从硬件模拟器, ISA, 运行时环境, 到自制OS, 库函数, 应用程序,
  可以让你深刻认识到程序如何在计算机上运行的每一处细节
  * 如果你选择直接在RTL实现的处理器上构建系统软件, 你首先需要保证你的处理器是对的:
    如果你的流水线在某个极端场景下和总线交互有问题, 你的自制OS和复杂应用程序(例如仙剑)都跑不起来.
    相对地, 正确实现一个模拟器, 比正确实现RTL要容易得多
* 在企业流程中, 模拟器是处理器测试验证的一个重要组件.
  通过引入PA, 我们希望让大家在"一生一芯"中也能体会到企业中的处理器开发流程.
  同时, 我们还希望大家可以理解模拟器中的每一处细节,
  需要的时候可以自行对它进行定制, 而不是把它当作一个和自己没有关系的外部工具 -->

* PA covers most of the tasks of system engineering skills development: from hardware simulators, ISA, and runtime environments, to homemade OS, libraries, and applications, it gives you a deep understanding of every detail of how a program runs on a computer.
  * If you choose to build your system software directly on an RTL-implemented processor, you first need to make sure that your processor is the implemented correct:
  if your pipeline has problems interacting with the bus in some extreme scenario, your homemade OS and complex applications (such as Chinese PAL) won't run. 
  In contrast, it is much easier to implement a simulator correctly than to implement RTL correctly.
* In enterprise processes, simulators are an important component of processor testing and verification.
  By introducing PA, we hope to give everyone a taste of the processor development process in an enterprise setting, even in‘One Student One Chip’.
  At the same time, we also hope that everyone can understand every detail of the simulator,
  so that they can customise it themselves when needed, rather than treating it as an external tool that has nothing to do with them.


<!-- > #### info::"计算机系统基础"理论课课程资源
> 在完成PA的过程中, 如果你需要补充一些理论课的知识,
> 可以参考袁春风老师在中国大学MOOC上开设的课程: [上][mooc1], [中][mooc2], [下][mooc3] -->
> #### info::'Computer Systems Fundamentals'Theory Course Resources
> During the PA process, if you need to supplement your theoretical knowledge,
> You may refer to Professor Yuan Chunfeng’s course on China University MOOC: [Part 1][mooc1], [Part 2][mooc2], [Part 3][mooc3]

[mooc1]: https://www.icourse163.org/course/NJU-1001625001
[mooc2]: https://www.icourse163.org/course/NJU-1001964032
[mooc3]: https://www.icourse163.org/course/NJU-1002532004

<!-- > #### todo::阅读PA讲义中的FAQ(常见问题)
> 在做PA之前, 我们强烈建议大家阅读[PA讲义中的FAQ][PA FAQ], 从而对PA有更多的了解. -->

> #### todo::Read the FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) in the PA handout.
> Before doing the PA, we strongly recommend that you read [FAQ in the PA handout][PA FAQ]  to get a better understanding of the PA.

[PA FAQ]: https://ysyx.oscc.cc/docs/en/ics-pa/FAQ.html

<!-- > #### todo::完成PA1
> 根据PA讲义完成相关内容(ISA选择默认的`riscv32`), 包括如下内容:
> * [基础设施:简易调试器][gdb]
> * [表达式求值][expr]
> * [监视点][watchpoint]
> * 完成PA1的必答题
> 直到你看到如下提示框:
> > #### flag::温馨提示
> > PA1到此结束... -->
> #### todo::Complete PA1
> Complete the relevant content according to the PA handout (ISA selects the default `riscv32`), including the following:
> * [Infrastructure: Simple Debugger][gdb]
> * [Expression evaluation][expr]
> * [Watchpoint][watchpoint]
> * Complete the required exercises in PA1
> until you see the following prompt box::
> > #### flag::hint
> > PThis is the end of PA1...


[gdb]: ../../ics-pa/1.4.md
[expr]: ../../ics-pa/1.5.html
[watchpoint]: ../../ics-pa/1.6.html
