<!-- # E7 提交入学答辩申请 -->
# E7 Submission of pre-study defense application

<!-- > #### comment::如果你感受到了独立解决问题的快乐
> 恭喜你!
>
> 因为这不仅意味着你的能力得到了肉眼可见的提升,
> 更重要的是你的内心也在变强, 和之前相比没那么害怕解决未知问题了.
> 这种心态的转变是至关重要的, 因为接下来还有无数的未知困难等着你去解决 :) -->

> #### comment::If you feel the joy of independent problem solving
> Congratulations!
>
> Because not only does it mean that you're getting better at what you do,
> but more importantly, you're getting stronger inside, and you're less afraid of solving unknown problems than before.
> This change of mindset is crucial, because there are still a lot of unknowns waiting to be solved  :)   

<!-- > #### todo::阅读"提问的智慧"和"别像弱智一样提问", 编写读后感
> 很快你就要进入正式学习了.
> 随着知识难度的增加, 学习过程对你独立解决问题的要求也会越来越高.
> 为了帮助你尽快适应正式阶段的学习,
> 你需要仔细阅读[提问的智慧][how to ask]和[别像弱智一样提问][stop ask]这两篇文章,
> 结合自己在预学习阶段提问和被提问的经历, 写一篇不少于800字的读后感,
> 谈谈你对"好的提问"以及"通过STFW, RTFM和RTFSC独立解决问题"的看法. -->


<!-- > 很快你就要进入正式学习了.
> 随着知识难度的增加, 学习过程对你独立解决问题的要求也会越来越高.
> 为了帮助你尽快适应正式阶段的学习,
> 你需要仔细阅读[提问的智慧][how to ask]和[别像弱智一样提问][stop ask]这两篇文章,
> 结合自己在预学习阶段提问和被提问的经历, 写一篇不少于800字的读后感,
> 谈谈你对"好的提问"以及"通过STFW, RTFM和RTFSC独立解决问题"的看法. -->

> #### todo::Read ‘How to Ask’ and ‘Stop Ask’ and write a book report.
>At the beginning of the preliminary we ask you to read the articles [how to ask] and [stop ask] carefully and prepare a report of at least 800 words after reading them.
>Please improve the essay with your own experience of completing the preliminary.
>Tell us how you solved the problems independently by using the methods advocated in these articles.

[how to ask]: https://github.com/ryanhanwu/How-To-Ask-Questions-The-Smart-Way/blob/master/README-zh_CN.md
[stop ask]: https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md

<!-- > #### todo::完成必做题并提交入学答辩申请
> 请根据["一生一芯"入学答辩申请指引][application], 完成相应内容并提交申请. -->
> #### todo::Submit admission defense application
> ##### Apply for defense
> * Fill in [the sixth session of "One Student One Chip" - Application for Defense](https://docs.qq.com/sheet/DT0ZPSGZNZk1FWVFS?tab=BB08J2&u=7e80683417974ca19ee2fd0fed634f56). After applying, scan the QR code attached in the form to join the defense WeChat group and wait for the teaching assistant to release the defense notice. The defense starts at 9:30 am on Saturday (usually once every one to two weeks).
> ##### Preparation before defense
> * Pass the [general education questionnaire](https://www.wenjuan.pub/s/UZBZJv6ci37/#) (reach 100 points) and attach the screenshot to the defense application form. Set the permissions of the learning records and reading notes to "viewable by everyone".
> * Equipment check: camera, microphone.
> * Document inspection: You need to prepare identity documents (which can prove your identity, usually student card, student ID card, admission notice, graduation certificate, work license, driver's license, etc.).
> * Project environment check: Ability to run the code required for prestudy.
> * **Make sure the code is clear and prohibit cell phone screen recording.**
> ##### Defense process
> * Before the defense, enter the designated conference room in advance and wait according to the notice in the group.
> * During the defense process, turn on the camera and screen share the project.
> * At the end of the defense, if it is the first defense, the respondent will read the letter of commitment and leave the meeting.
> ##### Post-defense process
> * Pay attention to the "One Student One Chip" official account. The list of candidates who have passed the defense will be announced on the official account before 6:00 pm on the first Monday after the defense.
> * Students who pass the defense will fill in the personal information collection form in order to send the admission gift package and admission notice.
> * **For students who fail the entrance defense, the assistant will give study suggestions. Students need to apply for defense again after confirming that they meet the admission defense requirements. For students who apply for admission defense again, the teaching assistant will check their study records. If the progress does not meet the admission defense requirements, the teaching assistant may refuse the defense.**
> ##### Final interpretation
> The final interpretation right of the defense results belongs to the "One Student One Chip" project team.

<!-- [application]: https://fa45epzd9c7.feishu.cn/docx/JyoFdo2lHoeUblxWgAscqkjSnt5 -->
