<!-- # F1 如何科学地提问 -->
# F1 How to Ask Smart Questions

<!-- > #### hint::信息框说明
> 讲义中会出现一些信息框, 根据其颜色和左上角的图标可以得知信息的类别.
> 例如, 本信息框是一些提示相关的内容. 其它主要类别还有
> > #### flag::实验进度相关的提示
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### comment::扩展阅读
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### question::选做思考题
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### option::选做编程题
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### todo::实验必做内容
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### danger::实验进度相关的必读信息
> -->
<!-- -->
<!-- > > #### caution::重要性超越实验的原则与方法 -->

> #### hint::Information Box Description
> There will be some information boxes in the handouts, and you can know the category of the information based on its color and the icon in the upper left corner. For example, this information box is about some prompt-related content. Information box categories mainly include:
>
> > #### flag::Progress-related Tips
>
> > #### comment::Further Reading
>
> > #### question::Optional Reflective Questions
>
> > #### option::Optional Programming Exercises
>
> > #### todo::Required Tasks
>
> > #### danger::Required Reading for Lab Progress
>
> > #### caution::Principles and Methods Beyond the Scope of the Lab

<!-- [ysyx-forum]: https://ysyx.oscc.cc/forum/ -->

<!-- > #### todo::填写通识问卷
> 在开始预学习的第一个任务之前，请大家认真阅读官网[《报名参与》](https://ysyx.oscc.cc/signup/)和[《常见问题》](https://ysyx.oscc.cc/project/faq.html)两部分内容，并填写[《“一生一芯”通识问卷》](https://www.wenjuan.pub/s/UZBZJv6ci37/#)。**注意：通识问卷可以重做很多次，只有达到100分才能申请入学答辩。** -->

<!-- 译者注：英文版删除通识问卷，保留signup和FAQ的部分 -->

> #### todo::Signup and FAQ
> Before starting the first task, please remember to ["Signup"](https://ysyx.oscc.cc/en/signup/) and carefully read the content in section ["FAQ"](https://ysyx.oscc.cc/en/project/faq.html).

<!-- > #### todo::创建并填写学习记录
> 你需要根据每天的学习情况填写学习记录,
> 具体格式可参考[学习记录表(模板)](https://docs.qq.com/sheet/DT2RPaWFzVGlzaG1T).
> 在后续的学习过程中, 这是助教评价你学习情况的其中一个维度. -->

> #### todo::Create and Write Your Own Learning Log
> You need to fill in your learning log based on your daily study progress.
> You may refer to the following format for details: [Learning Log(Template)](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1F-M6_u2bhEq_7jr1Iz3GCi914Mx9A_huiUcqFhHsq9k/edit?usp=sharing).
> Teaching Assistants (TAs) will evaluate your study performance in the subsequent learning process, and this will be one of the dimensions they consider.

<!-- > #### todo::阅读“提问的智慧”（一生一芯版）
> 你在预学习中的第一个任务, 就是现在仔细阅读[“提问的智慧”（一生一芯版）][how to ask]这篇文章,
>
> 我们设置这道题并不是为了故意浪费大家的时间, 也不是为了阻止大家提出任何问题,
> 而是为了让大家知道"怎么提问是正确的". 当你愿意为这些"正确的做法"去努力,
> 并且尝试用专业的方式提出问题的时候, 你就已经迈出了成为"成为专业人士"的第一步.

[how to ask]: https://fa45epzd9c7.feishu.cn/docx/KMnFdHMgIozXL5xGmHHcpuU8nre
-->

> #### todo::Read "How To Ask Questions The Smart Way"
> Your first task in OSOC is to read the articles ["How To Ask Questions The Smart Way"](http://www.catb.org/~esr/faqs/smart-questions.html).
>
> Reading these articles is not meant to waste your time or discourage you from asking questions. Rather, it is intended to help you understand what is considered "correct." When you’re willing to put effort into these correct practices and raise questions in a professional manner, you’ve already taken the first step toward becoming a professional.

<!-- > #### todo::大佬三连: STFW, RTFM, RTFSC
> 尝试在上述文章中寻找并理解这三个缩写的含义.
>
> 你可能会觉得字母F冒犯了你, 但事实上这个字母的含义从来都不是重点,
> 它只是反映出这三个缩写背后的传奇色彩而更容易被大家记住而已.
> 例如, RTFSC起源于Linux之父Linus Torvalds在1991年4月1日回复邮件中的第一句话,
> 目前在网上还能搜到当时的邮件列表.
> 有趣的是, Andrew S. Tanenbaum在[Lessons Learned from 30 Years of MINIX][minix]
> 一文中把这封邮件作为MINIX操作系统容易学习的一个例子:
> 还处于学生时代的Linus Torvalds在10天之内就把MINIX学得差不多了.

[minix]: https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/3/198874-lessons-learned-from-30-years-of-minix/fulltext -->

> #### todo::STFW, RTFM, RTFSC
> Try to find and understand the meanings of the three acronyms in the above article.
>
> You may feel offended by the F word, but in fact, its literal meaning is never the point. It simply reflects the legend behind the three acronyms and makes them easier to remember. For example, RTFSC originated from the first words written by Linus Torvalds, the father of Linux, in a reply to an email dated April 1, 1991 — a message that is still available on the Internet mailing list. Interestingly, Andrew S. Tanenbaum, in his article [Lessons Learned from 30 Years of MINIX](https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/3/198874-lessons-learned-from-30-years-of-minix/fulltext), cites this email as an example of how easy it was to learn the MINIX operating system: Linus Torvalds, as a student, learned MINIX in about 10 days.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### caution::与其说是学会提问, 倒不如说是学会不提问
> 很多同学不多不少都会抱有这样的观点:
> > 我向大佬请教, 大佬告诉我答案, 我就学习了.
>
> 但你是否想过, 将来你进入公司, 你的领导让你尝试一个技术方案;
> 或者是将来你进入学校的课题组, 你的导师让你探索一个新课题.
> 你可能会觉得: 到时候身边肯定有厉害的同事, 或者有师兄师姐来带我.
> 但实际情况是, 同事也要完成他的KPI, 师兄师姐也要做他们自己的课题,
> 没有人愿意被你一天到晚追着询问, 总有一天没有大佬告诉你答案, 你将要如何完成任务?
>
> 如果你觉得自己搞不定, 你很可能缺少<font color=red>独立解决问题的能力</font>.
>
> 但幸运的是, 这种能力是可以训练出来的.
> 你身边的大佬之所以成为了大佬, 是因为他们比你更早地锻炼出独立解决问题的能力:
> 当你还在向他们请教一个很傻的问题的时候, 他们早就解决过无数个奇葩问题了.
> 事实上, 你的能力是跟你独立解决问题的投入成正比的,
> 大佬告诉你答案, 展示的是大佬的能力, 并不是你的能力.
> 所以, 要锻炼出独立解决问题的能力, 更重要的是端正自己的心态:
> <font color=red>你来参加学习, 你就应该尽自己最大努力独立解决遇到的所有问题</font>
> (当然一些由于框架代码缺陷导致的问题除外). -->

> #### caution::Learning _Not_ to Ask > Learning to Ask
> Many students, more or less, tend to hold this viewpoint.:
> > I ask an expert for advice, and the expert gives me the answer, so I've learned.
>
> But have you ever considered this: when you join a company in the future, and your boss asks you to try out a technical solution; or when you join a research group at a university, and your supervisor assigns you to explore a new topic? You might think: there will surely be capable colleagues or senior students to guide me. However, the reality is that your colleagues have their own KPIs to meet, and senior students are focused on their own projects. No one wants to be chased by questions all day. Sooner or later, there won’t be an expert providing the answers. How will you complete your tasks then?
>
> If you feel like you can't handle it, you are likely lacking <font color=red>the ability to solve problems independently.</font>
>
> But fortunately, this ability can be trained. The reason why the experts around you became experts is that they developed the ability to independently solve problems earlier than you did. While you are still asking them what may seem like naive questions, they have already solved countless tricky problems. In fact, your abilities are directly proportional to your investment in independent problem-solving. When an expert gives you the answer, it showcases their abilities, not yours. Therefore, to develop the ability to independently solve problems, it's more important to adjust your mindset: <font color=red>when you learn, you should make every effort to solve all the problems you encounter on your own</font> (of course, excluding issues caused by framework code defects).

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### caution::我是一个很享受帮助别人的大佬
> 以南京大学令人闻风丧胆的PA实验为例, 我们见过太多这样的情况了:
> 每年学期开始的时候, 总有那么几位上一届的热心师兄在群里无微不至地解答新手同学的各种提问,
> 这些新手同学也确实在残酷的PA训练中感受到热心师兄为他们遮风挡雨的温暖.
> 但过了一两个月, 这些热心的师兄总是会突然消失, 留下这些新手同学在PA的寒风中彷徨地等待;
> 而另一部分同学早就在这一两个月的摸爬滚打中锻炼出正确的心态和技能,
> 成长为可以独当一面的专业人士, 在PA的鞭策下继续前行.
> 关于这些热心师兄突然消失的神秘原因, 我们不得而知,
> 也许是他们感受到自身的课业压力,
> 也许是他们对回答这些无尽的问题感到厌倦,
> 也许是他们突然觉得自己给新手同学提供的帮助其实帮不了他们.
> 但不管怎样, 那些新手同学已经无法独立完成PA的训练了,
> 因为他们将会面对比学期开始更困难的问题.
>
> 所以, 我们并不否认你在帮助同学的时候给你带来的成就感,
> 但我们认为, 有很多更严肃的问题需要思考:
> > 一个同学来提问, 如果说这个问题只是表象的话, 你能摸索出更本质的问题吗?
> >
> > 当一个同学不来询问你就无法解决问题的时候, 你之前所做的真的是在帮助他吗?
> >
> > 更重要地, 你能为这些同学的将来负责吗?
>
> 如果要问"你希望这位同学成长为什么样子", 我想大家的目标都是一致的:
> 希望他将来能成为可以独当一面的专业人士.
> 但同时你也需要认识到学习的规律: <font color=red>这是需要长期接受专业训练的</font>.
> 如果你仅仅把问题的答案告诉他, 他就可以成为专业人士,
> 那该如何对得起长年累月奋斗在一线的广大资深工程师们流下的汗水?
>
> 因此, <font color=red>你每一次直接把答案告诉他,
> 直接帮他们解决问题, 都是在剥夺他接受专业训练的机会.</font>
> 相反, 如果你真的希望能帮助他, 你可以尝试在不影响他训练的情况下指出他缺少的观念和技能,
> 该查资料/看手册/看代码, 就让他去查资料/看手册/看代码,
> 引导他针对问题提出自己的思考, 然后尝试并总结解决方案.
> 这对你和他来说都不容易, 但学习本身就是一件需要付出的事情:
> 如果你让他很方便地获得问题的答案, 那他就不能从解决这个问题的过程中收获应有的训练. -->

> #### caution::If You're Someone Who Truly Enjoys Helping Others
> Take the infamous PA experiment at Nanjing University as an example. We've seen this situation too many times: at the beginning of each semester, there are always a few enthusiastic senior students in the group who meticulously answer the various questions of the new students. These new students indeed feel the warmth of the seniors shielding them from the harsh PA training. However, after a month or two, these enthusiastic seniors suddenly disappear, leaving the new students to wander in the cold wind of PA, waiting for answers. Meanwhile, another group of students, through the struggles and challenges of those one or two months, have developed the right mindset and skills, growing into professionals capable of standing on their own, continuing to move forward under the pressure of PA. As for the mysterious reasons behind the sudden disappearance of these helpful seniors, we can only speculate. Perhaps they felt the pressure of their own academic workload, or maybe they became weary of answering endless questions, or they suddenly realized that the help they provided to the new students wasn't really helping them. Regardless, the new students are now unable to complete the PA training independently because they will face even more difficult problems than those at the start of the semester.
>
> Therefore, we do not deny the sense of accomplishment that helping your peers brings, but we believe there are many more serious issues that need to be considered:
>
> > What if some student asked a simply question, can you drill down to the root cause of it?
> >
> > When a student cannot solve the problem without coming to you, were you truly helping them with what you did before?
> >
> > More importantly, can you take responsibility for these students' future?
>
> If we were to ask, "What do you hope this student will grow into?" I believe everyone’s goal is the same: we hope that, in the future, they will become professionals capable of standing on their own. But at the same time, you must recognize the laws of learning: <font color=red>this requires long-term professional training.</font> If simply telling them the answer to a problem makes them a professional, then how can we honor the sweat and efforts of the seasoned engineers who have been working tirelessly at the frontlines for years?
>
> So, <font color=red>every time you give them an answer, every time you help them solve a problem, you are depriving them of the opportunity to receive professional training.</font> Instead, if you really want to help them you can try to point out the missing concepts and skills without interfering with their training, let them do the research/read the manual/look at the code if they need to, guide them to come up with their own thinking about the problem, and then try to summarize the solution indenpendently. It's not easy for you or for them, but learning is a costly process: if you make it easy for them to get the answer to a problem, then they won't get the training they need by solving the problem.

> #### comment::Channels for Asking Questions
> * Group chat (recommended): students who are more proactive have more potential to be developed into teaching assistants. (Group Chat QR Codes are in ["Signup"](https://ysyx.oscc.cc/en/signup/))
> * Private chat with TAs (Note: TAs may have other tasks and may not be able to respond promptly).