<!-- # F2 Logisim安装和使用 -->
# F2 Installing and Using Logisim

<!-- Logisim是一款图形化的数字电路设计软件, 用户可以通过拖动相应的电路组件来设计数字电路并仿真运行.
后续我们使用的是Logisim-evolution, 它是Logisim的升级版, 提供了更丰富的组件.
但为了描述简便, 下文我们还是使用`Logisim`来指代这个升级版. -->

Logisim is a graphical digital circuit design software that allows the user to design and simulate digital circuits by dragging and dropping the appropriate circuit components. We will use Logisim-evolution, which is an updated version of Logisim with a wider range of components. However, for simplicity of description, we will use `Logisim` to refer to this upgrade in the following.

<!-- > #### comment::软件仿真的好处
> 通过Logisim这类仿真软件来搭建电路有如下好处:
> * 免费: 无需采购真实的设备和元件
> * 灵活: 可提供数量无限的元件, 电路设计不受面包板大小的约束
> * 元件不会老化: 如果你用过面包板, 你可能会经历过因为元件损坏而调试半天的沮丧
> * 安全: 无需担心短路等可能会引起事故的危险事件 -->

> #### comment::Benefits of Software Simulation
> The use of simulation software like Logisim to design circuits offers the following advantages:
> * **Free:** No need to purchase real equipment and components.
> * **Flexible:** Provides an unlimited number of components, and circuit design is not constrained by the size of a breadboard.
> * **No Component Aging:** If you've used a breadboard, you may have experienced the frustration of debugging for hours due to damaged components.
> * **Safe:** No need to worry about risks such as short circuits or other hazardous events that could lead to accidents.

<!-- ## 环境需求 -->
## Environmental Requirements

<!-- Logisim-evolution是一个Java程序，可以运行在任何支持Java运行环境的操作系统上。
虽然它支持在Windows、Mac OS、Linux等各种主流系统上运行，但目前我们不要求大家使用Linux操作系统。
如果你有一些Linux操作系统的使用经验，可以自己解决环境配置相关的问题，也可以使用Linux版本。

Logisim-evolution需要Java16以上的版本，在这里我们推荐Java17版本。
如果想选择更新的Java21或Java22进行体验，只需要使用同样的方式下载对应版本即可。

可以访问[Oracle官网的下载页面][java download]，并根据自己的操作系统进行下载。
以Windows为例，大家会看到三种不同的下载方式：
`x64 Compressed Archive`、`x64 Installer`、`x64 MSI Installer`。
在这里我们推荐使用最简单的`x64 Installer`进行下载，
它无需进行自定义的用户配置，可以直接指定目录下载。 -->

Logisim-evolution is a Java-based application capable of operating on any operating system that supports the Java Runtime Environment (JRE).  
While it is compatible with mainstream systems such as Windows, Mac OS, and Linux, the current curriculum does not mandate the use of the Linux operating system.  
If you possess prior experience with Linux-based systems and are proficient in resolving environment configuration issues, you may opt to utilize the Linux version of the software.

Logisim-evolution requires Java version 16 or higher, and we recommend using Java version 17 for optimal compatibility and performance.  
If you wish to experiment with newer versions such as Java 21 or Java 22, you may download the corresponding versions using the same method. 

You can access the [Download on Oracle Website][java download] and select the appropriate version based on your operating system.  
For Windows users, three distinct download options are typically available:
`x64 Compressed Archive`、`x64 Installer`、`x64 MSI Installer`.
We recommend utilizing the `x64 Installer` for its simplicity, as it eliminates the need for manual user configuration and allows for direct directory specification during the installation process. This method ensures a streamlined setup with minimal user intervention, making it ideal for users seeking a straightforward installation experience.

[java download]: https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/#java17

<!-- ## 下载安装 -->
## Download and Installation

<!-- Logisim-evolution支持包管理器和源码编译两种方式，在这里推荐大家使用最简单快捷的包管理器方式进行下载。

如果你有条件访问Github，可以尝试访问[Logisim-evolution项目的release页面][logisim release]。
如果你不能打开这个页面，可以使用下文的网盘方式下载。
如果你可以打开这个页面，则在最新的V3.8.0版本的`Assets`列表中找到适合你自己操作系统的安装包，点击即可下载安装包。
如果你使用x86的Windows，请选择`logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi`；
如果你使用Mac OS，请选择`logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg`。 -->

Logisim-evolution supports two installation methods: package manager and source code compilation. Here, we recommend utilizing the package manager approach for its simplicity and efficiency.

If you have access to GitHub, you can navigate to the [release page of the Logisim-evolution project][logisim release].
If you are unable to access this page, you may utilize the alternative download link provided later in this guide.  
If you can access the page, locate the latest release version, V3.8.0, and under the `Assets` section, select the installation package compatible with your operating system. Click the corresponding file to initiate the download.
For users running **x86-based Windows systems**, please select `logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi`;
For **Mac OS users**, please choose `logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg`.

[logisim release]: https://github.com/logisim-evolution/logisim-evolution/releases

<!-- 如果你没有配置科学，无法访问Github，则可以通过我们提供的网盘方式进行下载。
我们提供了x86 Windows和Mac OS两种环境的安装包。

如果你使用Windows，通过以下网盘链接下载压缩包：
```
链接：https://pan.baidu.com/s/1sZDZ3EWgtzVfCelfl0OJ2Q?pwd=q4aq
提取码：q4aq
``` -->

If you can't access Github, then you can download it through the web-based method we provide.
We provide installers for both x86 Windows and Mac OS environments.

If you are using Windows, download the zip via the following web link：
```
Link: https://pan.baidu.com/s/1sZDZ3EWgtzVfCelfl0OJ2Q?pwd=q4aq
Passcode: q4aq
```

<!-- 解压后你会看到两个文件`jdk-17_windows-x64_bin.exe`和`logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi`，
请先运行`jdk-17_windows-x64_bin.exe`配置Java环境（你只需要调整一下下载路径然后下一步即可），
然后运行`logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi`进行安装。 -->

After unpacking you will see two files `jdk-17_windows-x64_bin.exe` and `logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi`.
Please run `jdk-17_windows-x64_bin.exe` first to configure the Java environment (you just need to adjust the download path and then next step).
Then run `logisim-evolution-3.8.0-x86.msi` to install it.

<!-- 如果你使用Mac OS，通过以下网盘链接下载压缩包：
```
链接：https://pan.baidu.com/s/19tOKo1FD-zAyiIquhIKh1A?pwd=l5j2
提取码：l5j2
```
解压后你会看到两个文件`jdk-17_macos-x64_bin.dmg`和`logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg`，
请先运行`jdk-17_macos-x64_bin.dmg`配置Java环境，
然后运行`logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg`进行安装。 -->

If you are using Mac OS, download the zip via the following web link：
```
Link: https://pan.baidu.com/s/19tOKo1FD-zAyiIquhIKh1A?pwd=l5j2
Passcode: l5j2
```
After unpacking you will see two files `jdk-17_macos-x64_bin.dmg` and `logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg`.
Please run `jdk-17_macos-x64_bin.dmg` to configure the Java environment first.
Then run `logisim-evolution-3.8.0.dmg` to install it.

<!-- > #### todo::安装Logisim
> 根据上述步骤安装Logisim. 安装后, 尝试打开Logisim, 检查软件能否正确运行. -->

> #### todo::Install Logisim
> Install Logisim according to the above steps. After installation, try to open Logisim and check if the software works correctly.

<!-- ## 探索Logisim -->
## Explore Logisim

<!-- > #### option::切换中文语言
> 如果你的英文阅读能力尚可, 我们还是建议你使用英文语言.
> 如果你希望切换到中文版本, 可以通过点击菜单的`File->Preferences`,
> 在弹出的对话框中选择`International`选卡, 然后将`Language`设置为`中文`.
>
> 但中文翻译有的词汇使用并不标准, 例如将`library`翻译为`图书馆`.
> 因此后续讲义中介绍Logisim时主要还是给出英文词汇, 并在括号中给出中文版的翻译. -->

<!-- 译者注：因为使用英文讲义的基本上母语非中文，所以省略了中文讲义中涉及到有关Chinese的翻译 -->

> #### option::Switch Language
> If you can read English well, we still recommend you to keep using English.
> If you want to switch to Chinese or other languages, you can do it by clicking `File->Preferences` in the menu, > and selecting `International` tab in the popup dialogue box.
> Select the `International` tab in the pop-up dialogue box, and set `Language` to `Chinese` or others.
>
> However, some translations use non-standard terminology.
> Therefore, the subsequent handouts on Logisim will mainly give the English terminology.

<!-- > #### todo::在Logisim中设计你的第一个数字电路
> 你的第一个任务是RTFM:
> 点击菜单的`Help(帮助)->Tutorial(教程)`, 将会弹出Logisim官方文档中的初学者教程.
> 教程分6个部分, 你需要一边阅读教程,
> 一边在Logisim中完成相关的操作, 以此来熟悉Logisim的使用.
>
> 官方教程中的某些中文翻译并不标准, 截图内容也仍然是英文的, 不过这些并不会对你的理解造成太大障碍,
> 必要时可以将语言切换回英文, 阅读原版教程以理解其确切含义. -->

> #### todo::Design Your First Digital Circuit in Logisim
> Your first task is RTFM.
> Click on `Help->Tutorual` in the menu, and it will bring up the beginner's tutorial from the official Logisim documentation.
> The tutorial is divided into 6 parts, you need to read the tutorial, > while working in Logisim.
> You will need to read the tutorials while completing the operations in Logisim to become familiar with the use of Logisim.
>
> If necessary, you can switch back to English and read the original tutorials to understand exactly what they mean.

<!-- > #### todo::探索Logisim的图形界面
> 阅读Logisim官方文档中的`The graphical interfaces(图形界面)`
> 部分和`Menu reference(菜单参考)`部分, 了解一些功能和基本操作. -->

> #### todo::Explore Graphical Interfaces of Logisim
> Read the `The graphical interfaces` section and the `Menu reference` section of the official Logisim documentation to learn about some of the features and basic operations.
> section and the `Menu reference` section of the official Logisim documentation, to get a feel for some of the features and basic operations.

<!-- 对于一个电路模块来说, 输入和输出是非常重要的:
输出能够帮助用户直接观察电路的运行结果, 而改变输入能够检查电路在各种状态下的行为是否符合预期.
简单探索过Logisim后, 此处介绍一些常用的输入输出元件:
* 输入元件: Button(按钮), Dip Switch(拨码开关)
* 输出元件: LED, 7-Segment Display(7段数码管) -->

Inputs and outputs are very important for a circuit module.
Outputs allow the user to directly observe the results of the circuit's operation, while changing inputs allows the user to check that the circuit behaves as expected in various states.
After a brief exploration of Logisim, here are some common input and output components.
* Inputs: Button, Dip Switch
* Outputs: LED, 7-Segment Display

<!-- > #### todo::RTFM了解元件的功能
> 在官方文档的目录中找到`Library Reference(电路元件库参考手册)->Input/Output library(输入/输出)`,
> 阅读上述输入输出元件的功能. -->

> #### todo::RTFM to Understand the Function of the Components
> Find `Library Reference` -> Input/Output library in the directory of the official documentation, > read the functions of the above input and output components.
> Read about the functions of the above input/output components.

<!-- > #### todo::使用Logisim设计你感兴趣的电路
> 通过教程掌握Logisim的基本使用方式后, 尝试探索Logisim中的其他元件和功能.
> 然后发挥你的想象力, 设计一个你觉得有意思的数字电路, 并尝试仿真运行, 检查结果是否符合你的预期. -->

> #### todo::Use Logisim to Design Circuits You Are Interested In.
> Once you have mastered the basics of Logisim through the tutorials, try to explore the other components and functions in Logisim.
> Then use your imagination to design a digital circuit that you find interesting, and try to run a simulation to check that the results meet your expectations.