<!-- # 支持RV32E的单周期NPC -->
# Single-cycle NPC (Non-Pipelined CPU) supporting RV32E

<!-- 有了对运行时环境的基本认识, 你就知道应该给NPC提供怎么样的运行时环境来支撑程序的运行了.
由于B阶段的目标是帮助大家建立对处理器芯片的基本认识, 因此我们弱化了B阶段的性能指标,
在此基础上, 我们可以通过降低设计的复杂度来节省流片成本, 使得相同面积可容纳更多同学的设计.
因此, 目前我们让NPC采用RV32E指令集; 在A阶段的后期启动Linux时, 我们将逐步采用RV64IMAC指令集. -->
With a basic understanding of the runtime environment, you will know what kind of runtime environment to provide for NPC to support program execution.
Since the goal of Stage B is to establish a basic understanding of processor chips, we have downplayed performance metrics in Stage B.
Based on this, we can save chip fabrication costs by reducing the complexity of the design, allowing more designs from students to fit within the same area.
Therefore, currently, we have NPC adopting the RV32E instruction set.
As we progress to the later stages of Stage A, when launching Linux, we will gradually transition to the RV64IMAC instruction set.

<!-- 需要说明的是, 虽然NEMU采用RV32IM, 与NPC采用的RV32E有所不同,
但RV32E的程序可以直接运行在RV32IM的处理器上.
因此, 只要我们确保已经将程序编译到RV32E,
即使我们把RV32IM的NEMU作为DiffTest的REF, 也可以正常工作. -->
It should be noted that while NEMU adopts RV32IM, which differs from NPC's use of RV32E, programs written for RV32E can run directly on a processor using the RV32IM instruction set. Therefore, as long as we ensure that the program has been compiled for RV32E, even if we use the RV32IM version of NEMU as the REF for DiffTest, it should function correctly.

<!-- > #### hint::我从第五期转入, 如何将RV64IM修改为RV32E?
> 修改为RV32E需要进行如下操作:
> * NEMU - 可通过`make menuconfig`将`Base ISA`改为`riscv32`,
>   然后在`nemu/src/isa/riscv32`下实现RV32IM即可.
>   部分RV32指令的语义与RV64所有不同, 我们建议你依照手册重新实现一遍, 保证对指令的理解无误.
> * AM - 支持RV32E需要改动较多内容, 我们建议你重新克隆`abstract-machine`, 具体操作如下:
>   1. 把`ysyx-workbench/abstract-machine`拷贝到其他目录
>   1. 删除`ysyx-workbench/abstract-machine`目录
>   1. 修改`ysyx-workbench/init.sh`文件如下:
>      ```diff
>      --- ysyx-workbench/init.sh
>      +++ ysyx-workbench/init.sh
>      @@ -45,4 +45,4 @@
>         abstract-machine)
>      -    init NJU-ProjectN/abstract-machine ysyx2204 abstract-machine true AM_HOME
>      +    init NJU-ProjectN/abstract-machine ics2023 abstract-machine true AM_HOME
>           init NJU-ProjectN/fceux-am ics2021 fceux-am false
>           ;;
>      ```
>   1. 运行`bash init.sh abstract-machine`
>   1. 可参考已经拷贝到其他目录的`abstract-machine`将相应代码拷贝回来
>   1. 删除已经拷贝到其他目录的`abstract-machine`
> * NPC - 直接修改RTL实现即可 -->
> #### hint::How to Modify RV64IM to RV32E?
> To modify RV64IM to RV32E, you need to perform the following steps:
> * **NEMU**: You can change the `Base ISA` to `riscv32` by using `make menuconfig`,
> then implement RV32IM under `nemu/src/isa/riscv32`.
> Since some RV32 instructions have different semantics from RV64, it's recommended to re-implement them according to the manual to ensure a correct understanding of the instructions.
> * **AM**: Supporting RV32E requires significant changes. We suggest you clone `abstract-machine` again, following these steps:
> 1. Copy the `ysyx-workbench/abstract-machine` directory to another location.
> 1. Delete the `ysyx-workbench/abstract-machine` directory.
> 1. Modify the `ysyx-workbench/init.sh` file as follows:
>    ```diff
>    --- ysyx-workbench/init.sh
>    +++ ysyx-workbench/init.sh
>    @@ -45,4 +45,4 @@
>       abstract-machine)
>    -    init NJU-ProjectN/abstract-machine ysyx2204 abstract-machine true AM_HOME
>    +    init NJU-ProjectN/abstract-machine ics2023 abstract-machine true AM_HOME
>         init NJU-ProjectN/fceux-am ics2021 fceux-am false
>         ;;
>    ```
> 1. Run `bash init.sh abstract-machine`.
> 1. Refer to the `abstract-machine` copied to another directory to bring back the corresponding code.
> 1. Delete the `abstract-machine` directory copied to another directory.
> * NPC: Directly modify the RTL implementation.

<!-- ## 搭建面向riscv32e-npc的运行时环境 -->
## Build a runtime environment for riscv32e-npc.

<!-- AM项目已经提供了riscv32e-npc的基本框架, 你只需要在`am-kernels/tests/cpu-tests/`目录下执行
```bash
make ARCH=riscv32e-npc ALL=xxx
```
即可将名为`xxx`的测试编译到`riscv32e-npc`的运行时环境中.
为了熟悉流程, 我们先尝试在NPC中运行dummy程序. -->
The AM project has provided the basic framework for RISC-V32E-NPC. You only need to execute the following command in the `am-kernels/tests/cpu-tests/` directory:

```bash
make ARCH=riscv32e-npc ALL=xxx
```

This will compile the test named `xxx` into the runtime environment of `riscv32e-npc`.
To familiarize ourselves with the process, let's first attempt to run a dummy program on NPC.

<!-- > #### todo::从命令行中读入NPC需要执行的程序
> 接下来我们将会在NPC中不断地运行各种程序, 如果每次运行新程序都要重新编译NPC, 效率是很低的.
> 为了提高效率, 我们可以让仿真环境从命令行中读入程序的路径, 然后把程序内容放置到存储器中. -->
> #### todo::Read NPC Program Execution Path from Command Line
> Next, we will continuously run various programs on NPC. It would be inefficient to recompile NPC every time we run a new program.
> To improve efficiency, we can instruct the simulation environment to read the program's path from the command line, and then place the program content into the memory.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### hint::程序在哪里? 应该如何读入到仿真环境中?
> 如果你仍然对这些感到疑惑, 说明你之前并没有完全理解NEMU是如何读入程序的. -->
> #### hint::Where is the Program? How to Load it into the Simulation Environment?
> If you're still uncertain about these aspects, it indicates that you may not have fully understood how NEMU reads programs before.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::一键编译并在NPC上运行AM程序
> 在AM项目中, Makefile并没有为`riscv32e-npc`提供`run`目标. 尝试为`riscv32e-npc`提供`run`目标,
> 使得键入`make ARCH=riscv32e-npc ALL=xxx run`即可把AM程序编译并在NPC上运行. -->
> #### todo::Compile and Run AM Programs on NPC with One Command
> In the AM project, the Makefile does not provide a `run` target for `riscv32e-npc`.
> Try to provide a `run` target for `riscv32e-npc` so that typing `make ARCH=riscv32e-npc ALL=xxx run` will compile the AM program and run it on NPC.

<!-- 为了运行dummy程序, NPC还需要实现一些指令. 具体地
* `auipc`, `lui`: 它们属于整数计算指令, 思考一下, 如何让这些指令与`addi`共享同一个加法器?
* `jal`, `jalr`: 它们属于条无条件跳转指令, 执行之后, PC将会被修改, 这应该如何实现?
* `sw`: 这条指令需要访存内存, 不过对于dummy程序来说, 不实现这条`sw`指令也不影响运行的结果.
  因此目前你可以将它实现成空指令, 我们会在后面再来正确地实现它. -->
To run the dummy program, NPC needs to implement some instructions. Specifically:
* `auipc` and `lui`: They belong to integer computation instructions. Consider how to share the same adder with `addi`.
* `jal` and `jalr`: They are unconditional jump instructions. After execution, the Program Counter (PC) will be modified. How should this be implemented?
* `sw`: This instruction requires memory access. However, for the dummy program, not implementing this `sw` instruction will not affect the program's execution.
  Therefore, you can implement it as a no-operation (NOP) instruction for now. We'll implement it correctly later on.

<!-- > #### todo::如果你是初学者, 尝试自己画出架构图
> 如果你是处理器设计的初学者, 尝试在之前的架构图上添加`auipc`, `lui`, `jal`, `jalr`的电路. -->
> #### todo::If you're a beginner, try drawing the architecture diagram yourself.
> If you're new to processor design, try adding circuits for `auipc`, `lui`, `jal`, and `jalr` to the previous architecture diagram.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::在NPC上运行dummy程序
> 实现上述指令, 使得NPC可以运行dummy程序.
> 不过目前`riscv32e-npc`的`halt()`函数是一个死循环,
> 你可以通过查看波形来检查NPC是否成功进入了`halt()`函数. -->
> #### todo::Run the dummy Program on NPC
> Implement the instructions mentioned above so that NPC can run the dummy program.
> However, currently, the `halt()` function in `riscv32e-npc` is an infinite loop.
> You can check whether NPC successfully enters the `halt()` function by examining the waveform.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::实现riscv32e-npc中的halt()函数
> 为了可以自动地结束程序, 你需要在`riscv32e-npc`中实现TRM的halt()函数, 在其中添加一条`ebreak`指令.
> 这样以后, 在NPC上运行的AM程序在结束的时候就会执行`ebreak`指令, 从而通知NPC的仿真环境结束仿真.
>
> 实现之后, 你就可以通过一条命令自动在NPC上运行AM程序并自动结束仿真了. -->
> #### todo::Implement the `halt()` Function in `riscv32e-npc`
> To automatically end the program, you need to implement the `halt()` function in `riscv32e-npc`, where you add an `ebreak` instruction.
> After this, when an AM program running on NPC finishes, it will execute the `ebreak` instruction, signaling the NPC's simulation environment to end the simulation.
>
> Once implemented, you can run AM programs on NPC and automatically end the simulation with a single command.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::为NPC实现HIT GOOD/BAD TRAP
> NEMU可以输出"程序是否成功结束执行"的信息, 尝试在NPC中实现相似的功能,
> 这样以后, 你就可以知道程序在NPC上是否成功结束了. -->
> #### todo::Implement HIT GOOD/BAD TRAP for NPC
> NEMU can output information about whether the program has successfully completed execution. Try implementing similar functionality in NPC.
> This way, you'll be able to know whether the program has successfully ended on NPC in the future.

<!-- ## 为NPC搭建基础设施 -->
## Build Infrastructure for NPC

<!-- 通过完成PA, 你应该意识到基础设施的重要性了.
在PA中有四大基础设施: sdb, trace, native, DiffTest.
除了native属于AM之外, 其余三大基础设施都可以在NPC中搭建. -->
Through the process of learning PA, you should realize the importance of infrastructure.
In PA, there are four main infrastructures: sdb, trace, native, and DiffTest.
Except for native, which belongs to AM, the other three infrastructures can be built in NPC.

<!-- > #### caution::我都能看波形了, 为什么还需要这些基础设施?
> 这是希望大家不要沦为工具人, 从而浪费生命.
>
> 波形确实包含了电路中所有信号每个周期的信息, 但这些信息太底层了,
> 它们无法携带任何高层的语义, 导致需要用户自己从这些海量信息之中寻找错误.
>
> 事实上, bug引发的错误, 在不同的抽象层次中都是有表现的,
> 例如RTL的实现中连错了一个信号, 反映到程序运行中,
> 可能是取到了错误的指令, 访问了非法内存, 或者是从函数返回到一个不正确的位置...
> 虽然你最终也能从0和1变化的波形中分析出这些错误,
> 但如果你可以直接从itrace/mtrace/ftrace的输出中发现问题, 不是更香吗?
> 为什么你要浪费这么多时间来做这些工具本来就做得很好的事情呢?
> 况且, 如果这个bug是软件层次的问题, 看波形来调试不是自找麻烦吗?
>
> 科学的调试过程首先需要理解程序如何在计算机上运行,
> 此外还需要理解各种工具的优缺点, 根据不同的场景选择正确的工具来分析问题.
> 根据计算机系统的抽象层视角, 我们可以从不同的层次观察程序运行的行为:
> > 程序 -> 模块 -> 函数 -> 指令 -> 访存 -> 总线 -> 信号
>
> 层次越高, 行为越容易理解, 但细节也越来越模糊;
> 而层次越低, 细节会越精确, 但行为也越来越难理解.
> 因此, 科学的调试方法应该是:
> * 先使用正确的软件工具帮助你迅速定位bug产生的大概位置
> * 然后再结合波形在很小的范围内进行更细粒度的诊断, 找到bug的精确位置 -->
> #### caution::I can already see the waveform, why do I need these infrastructures?
> This is to prevent everyone from becoming mere tools, thus wasting life.
>
> While waveforms indeed contain information about every signal in the circuit for each cycle, this information is too low-level. It cannot carry any higher-level semantics, which means users need to sift through this massive amount of information to find errors themselves.
>
> In fact, errors caused by bugs manifest themselves at different abstraction levels. For example, a single signal error in RTL implementation might result in fetching the wrong instruction or accessing illegal memory during program execution, or returning to an incorrect position from a function call...
> While you can eventually analyze these errors from the changing 0s and 1s in the waveform,
> wouldn't it be better if you could directly identify the problem from the output of itrace/mtrace/ftrace?
> Why waste so much time doing what these tools can already do well?
> Moreover, if the bug is a software-level problem, isn't it troublesome to debug by looking at waveforms?
>
> A scientific debugging process first requires an understanding of how programs run on computers.
> Additionally, it requires an understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of various tools and selecting the right tools to analyze problems based on different scenarios.
> From the perspective of abstraction layers in computer systems, we can observe program behavior at different levels:
> > Program -> Module -> Function -> Instruction -> Memory Access -> Bus -> Signal
>
> The higher the level, the easier it is to understand behavior, but the details become more obscure.
> On the other hand, the lower the level, the more precise the details, but the behavior becomes harder to understand.
> Therefore, a scientific debugging method should:
> * First, use the right software tools to help you quickly locate the approximate location where the bug occurred.
> * Then, combine waveforms to conduct more granular diagnosis within a very small range to find the precise location of the bug.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::为NPC搭建sdb
> 你需要为NPC实现单步执行, 打印寄存器和扫描内存的功能,
> 而表达式求值和监视点都是基于打印寄存器和扫描内存实现的.
> 单步执行和扫描内存都很容易实现.
> 为了打印寄存器, 你可以通过Verilator编译出的C++文件来访问通用寄存器,
> 例如`top->rootp->NPC__DOT__isu__DOT__R_ext__DOT__Memory`,
> 具体的C++变量名与Verilog中的模块名和变量名有关, 可阅读编译出的C++头文件得知. -->
> #### todo::Build sdb for NPC
> You need to implement single-step execution, register printing, and memory scanning functionalities for NPC. 》 > Expression evaluation and watchpoints are both based on printing registers and scanning memory.
> Single-step execution and memory scanning are both straightforward to implement.
> To print registers, you can access general-purpose registers using the C++ files compiled by Verilator, such as `top->rootp->NPC__DOT__isu__DOT__R_ext__DOT__Memory`. > The specific C++ variable names are related to the module names and variable names in Verilog, which can be found by reading the compiled C++ header files.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::为NPC添加trace支持
> 你已经在NEMU中实现itrace, mtrace和ftrace了, 尝试在NPC中实现它们.
> 其中, 实现itrace需要注意两点:
> * 需要通过DPI-C获取当前执行的指令
> * 需要链接llvm库, 具体可以参考`nemu/src/utils/filelist.mk`
>
> 在仿真环境获取到当前执行的指令之后, ftrace也就不难实现了.
> 至于mtrace, 由于目前NPC还不支持访存指令, 因此我们之后再实现它. -->
> #### todo::Add trace support to NPC
> You have already implemented itrace, mtrace, and ftrace in NEMU. Try implementing them in NPC.
> Specifically, when implementing itrace, two points need to be noted:
> * You need to obtain the currently executed instruction through DPI-C.
> * You need to link the LLVM library. For details, you can refer to `nemu/src/utils/filelist.mk`.
>
> Once you have obtained the currently executed instruction in the simulation environment, implementing ftrace should not be difficult. As for mtrace, since NPC does not yet support memory access instructions, we will implement it later.

<!-- > #### todo::为NPC添加DiffTest支持
> DiffTest是处理器调试的一大杀手锏, 在为NPC实现更多指令之前, 为其搭建DiffTest是一个明智的选择.
> 在这里, DUT是NPC, 而REF则选择NEMU. 为此, 你需要
> * 在`nemu/src/cpu/difftest/ref.c`中实现DiffTest的API, 包括`difftest_memcpy()`,
>   `difftest_regcpy()`和`difftest_exec()`. 此外`difftest_raise_intr()`是为中断准备的, 目前暂不使用
> * 在NEMU的menuconfig中选择共享库作为编译的目标
> ```
> Build target (Executable on Linux Native)  -
>   (X) Shared object (used as REF for differential testing)
> ```
> * 重新编译NEMU, 成功后将会生成动态库文件`nemu/build/riscv32-nemu-interpreter-so`
> * 在NPC的仿真环境中通过动态链接方式链接上述的动态库文件, 通过其中的API来实现DiffTest的功能,
>   具体可以参考NEMU的相关代码
>
> 尝试在打开DiffTest机制的情况下在NPC中正确运行dummy程序.
> 为了检查DiffTest机制是否生效, 你可以为NPC中`addi`指令的实现注入一个错误,
> 观察DiffTest是否能够按照预期地报告这一错误.
>
> 注意, 为了再次将NEMU编译成ELF, 你还需要修改NEMU中menuconfig的编译目标. -->
> #### todo::Add DiffTest support to NPC
> DiffTest is a powerful tool for processor debugging. Before implementing more instructions for NPC, setting up DiffTest for it is a wise choice.
> Here, the Device Under Test (DUT) is NPC, while the Reference (REF) is NEMU. To achieve this, you need to:
> * Implement the DiffTest API in `nemu/src/cpu/difftest/ref.c`, including `difftest_memcpy()`, `difftest_regcpy()`, and `difftest_exec()`. Additionally, `difftest_raise_intr()` is prepared for interrupts, which are not currently used.
> * Select the shared library as the compilation target in NEMU's menuconfig:
> ```
> Build target (Executable on Linux Native)  --->
>   (X) Shared object (used as REF for differential testing)
> ```
> * Recompile NEMU. After successful compilation, a dynamic library file `nemu/build/riscv32-nemu-interpreter-so` will be generated.
> * Link the above dynamic library file in the simulation environment of NPC through dynamic linking, and implement the functionality of DiffTest through its API.
> You can refer to the relevant code in NEMU for details.
>
> Try running the dummy program correctly in NPC with the DiffTest mechanism enabled.
> To verify whether the DiffTest mechanism is effective, you can inject an error into the implementation of the `addi` instruction in NPC and observe if DiffTest can correctly report this error as expected.
>
> Note that to compile NEMU back to ELF format, you also need to modify the compilation target in NEMU's menuconfig.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### comment::我可以选择Spike作为REF吗?
> 考虑到NEMU比Spike的实现更简单, 而且大家也更熟悉, 我们还是优先推荐大家把自己的NEMU作为REF.
> 总有一天你需要在REF中添加一些个性化的功能来帮助你调试,
> 我们不希望大家觉得REF的代码跟自己没有关系.
> 因此, 如果你具备了阅读开源软件代码的能力, 是可以把Spike作为REF的. -->
> #### comment::Can I choose Spike as REF?
> Considering that NEMU's implementation is simpler than Spike's, and everyone is more familiar with it, we still recommend prioritizing using your own NEMU as REF.
> There will come a day when you need to add some personalized features to REF to help with debugging,
> We don't want everyone to feel like they have no connection to the REF code.
> Therefore, if you have the ability to read open source software code, you can use Spike as REF.

<!-- ## 实现RV32E指令集

准备好这些基础设施之后, 你就可以方便地在NPC中实现更多的RV32E指令了.
这些指令你已经在NEMU中都实现过了, 但在RTL中实现它们, 还需要注意一些细节:
* 计算指令: 这部分指令的执行主要是ALU单元完成的, 你已经在数字电路实验接触过它们了. 具体地
  * 加减法运算 - 在之前实现`addi`指令的时候, 你已经实现补码加法了.
    在电路中, 补码减法可以通过补码加法来实现.
    在RISC-V中, 加减法指令都无需判断进位和溢出
  * 逻辑运算 - 这个很简单
  * 移位运算 - 这个也不难, 直接用运算符就可以实现
  * 比较运算 - 可以归约到减法运算, 通过判断减法运算的结果来得出比较运算的结果 -->
## Implement RV32E Instruction Set

With these foundational infrastructures ready, you can conveniently implement more RV32E instructions in NPC. You've already implemented these instructions in NEMU, but implementing them in RTL requires focusing on some details:

* Arithmetic Instructions: The execution of these instructions is primarily handled by the ALU unit, which you have encountered in digital circuit experiments. Specifically,
  * Addition and Subtraction - You've already implemented two's complement addition when implementing the `addi` instruction earlier. Two's complement subtraction can be achieved through two's complement addition.
  In RISC-V, both addition and subtraction instructions do not require checking for carry and overflow.
  * Logical Operations - These are straightforward.
  * Shift Operations: These are also not difficult; you can directly implement them using operators.
  * Comparison Operations - These can be reduced to subtraction operations. The result of the subtraction operation is used to determine the result of the comparison operation.

<!-- > #### question::硬件如何区分有符号数和无符号数?
> 尝试编写以下程序:
> ```c
> #include <stdint.h>
> int32_t fun1(int32_t a, int32_t b) { return a + b; }
> uint32_t fun2(uint32_t a, uint32_t b) { return a + b; }
> ```
> 然后编译并查看反汇编代码:
> ```bash
> riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc -c -march=rv32g -mabi=ilp32 -O2 test.c
> riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -d test.o
> ```
> 这两个函数有什么不同? 思考一下这是为什么?

* 分支指令: 可以通过ALU中的减法运算来计算分支是否跳转
* 访存指令: 访存指令需要访问存储器, 与取指不同, 访存指令还可能需要将数据写入存储器.
  我们之前把取指的接口拉到顶层的简单实现方式, 并不能正确实现访存指令,
  这是因为访存接口的信号会依赖于当前取到的指令, 而仿真环境无法正确地处理这个依赖关系.
  为了解决这个问题, 我们可以通过DPI-C机制来实现访存:
  ```verilog
  import "DPI-C" function void pmem_read(
    input int raddr, output int rdata);
  import "DPI-C" function void pmem_write(
    input int waddr, input int wdata, input byte wmask);
  wire [63:0] rdata;
  always @(*) begin
    if (valid) begin // 有读写请求时
      pmem_read(raddr, rdata);
      if (wen) begin // 有写请求时
        pmem_write(waddr, wdata, wmask);
      end
    end
    else begin
      rdata = 0;
    end
  end
  ```
  ```c
  extern "C" void pmem_read(int raddr, int *rdata) {
    // 总是读取地址为`raddr & ~0x3u`的4字节返回给`rdata`
  }
  extern "C" void pmem_write(int waddr, int wdata, char wmask) {
    // 总是往地址为`waddr & ~0x3u`的4字节按写掩码`wmask`写入`wdata`
    // `wmask`中每比特表示`wdata`中1个字节的掩码,
    // 如`wmask = 0x3`代表只写入最低2个字节, 内存中的其它字节保持不变
  }
  ```
  我们在这两个内存读写函数中模拟了32位总线的行为: 它们只支持地址按4字节对齐的读写,
  其中读操作总是返回按4字节对齐读出的数据, 需要由RTL代码根据读地址选择出需要的部分.
  这样是为了将来在实现总线的时候不必改动太多的代码.
  你需要在Verilog代码中为这两个函数的调用传入正确的参数, 并在C++代码中实现这两个函数的功能.
  对于取指, 你需要删除之前把信号拉到顶层的实现, 然后额外调用一次`pmem_read()`来实现它. -->
> #### question::How does hardware differentiate between signed and unsigned numbers?
> Try writing the following program:
> ```c
> #include <stdint.h>
> int32_t fun1(int32_t a, int32_t b) { return a + b; }
> uint32_t fun2(uint32_t a, uint32_t b) { return a + b; }
> ```
> Then compile and examine the disassembly code:
> ```bash
> riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc -c -march=rv32g -mabi=ilp32 -O2 test.c
> riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -d test.o
> ```
> What are the differences between these two functions? Consider why this is the case.

* Branch Instructions: Branch conditions can be calculated using subtraction operations in the ALU.
* Memory Access Instructions: Memory access instructions require accessing the memory. Unlike instruction fetching, memory access instructions may also involve writing data into memory.
  Our previous simplistic implementation of bringing the instruction fetch interface to the top level couldn't correctly handle memory access instructions.
  This is because the signals for memory access depend on the currently fetched instruction, which the simulation environment cannot handle correctly.
  To address this issue, we can implement memory access through the DPI-C mechanism:
  ```verilog
  import "DPI-C" function void pmem_read(
    input int raddr, output int rdata);
  import "DPI-C" function void pmem_write(
    input int waddr, input int wdata, input byte wmask);
  wire [63:0] rdata;
  always @(*) begin
    if (valid) begin // When there are read or write requests
      pmem_read(raddr, rdata);
      if (wen) begin // When there are write requests
        pmem_write(waddr, wdata, wmask);
      end
    end
    else begin
      rdata = 0;
    end
  end
  ```
  ```c
  extern "C" void pmem_read(int raddr, int *rdata) {
    // Always read 4 bytes aligned to the address `raddr & ~0x3u` and return to `rdata`
  }
  extern "C" void pmem_write(int waddr, int wdata, char wmask) {
    // Always write `wdata` according to the write mask `wmask` into 4 bytes aligned to the address `waddr & ~0x3u`
    // Each bit in `wmask` represents a mask for 1 byte in `wdata`
    // For example, `wmask = 0x3` means only write the lowest 2 bytes, leaving the other bytes in memory unchanged
  }
  ```
  These memory read and write functions simulate the behavior of a 32-bit bus: they only support read and write operations aligned to 4 bytes.
  Read operations always return data aligned to 4 bytes, which needs to be selected by the RTL code based on the read address.
  This setup ensures that minimal changes are required when implementing the bus in the future.
  You need to pass the correct parameters to these function calls in Verilog code and implement the functionality of these two functions in C++ code.
  For instruction fetching, you need to remove the previous implementation of bringing signals to the top level and instead call `pmem_read()` once additionally to implement it.

<!-- https://github.com/verilator/verilator/issues/2626 -->

<!-- > #### todo::为NPC添加mtrace的支持
> 通过DPI-C实现访存读写函数之后, mtrace就很容易实现了. -->

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::如果你是初学者, 尝试自己画出架构图
> 如果你是处理器设计的初学者, 尝试画出一个完整的单周期处理器架构图. -->
> #### todo::Add mtrace support for NPC
> After implementing memory access read and write functions through DPI-C, adding mtrace becomes straightforward.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::观察ALU的综合结果
> 尝试使用`yosys-sta`项目对ALU进行综合, 观察综合结果, 回答如下问题:
> 1. 我们知道, 补码减法可以用加法器来实现,
>    而比较指令和分支指令本质上也需要通过补码减法来实现.
>    如果我们在RTL代码中直接编写`-`或`<`等各种运算符,
>    yosys能否自动将它们的减法功能合并为同一个加法器?
> 1. 移位运算符`<<`和`>>`被yosys综合成什么电路?
> 1. yosys从运算符直接综合出电路是否有改进的空间?
>
> hint: 如果你觉得32位数据的综合结果难以阅读,
> 可以考虑先观察并分析16位, 8位甚至4位数据的综合结果. -->
> #### todo::Observe the synthesis results of ALU
> Try using the `yosys-sta` project to synthesize the ALU, observe the synthesis results, and answer the following questions:
> 1. We know that two's complement subtraction can be implemented using an adder,
> and comparison instructions and branch instructions essentially require two's complement subtraction.
> If we directly write `-` or `<` operators in RTL code,
> can yosys automatically merge their subtraction functionality into the same adder?
> 1. What circuit does yosys synthesize for the shift operators `<<` and `>>`?
> 1. Is there room for improvement when yosys synthesizes circuits directly from operators?
>
> hint: If you find it difficult to read the synthesis results for 32-bit data, consider observing and analyzing the synthesis results for 16-bit, 8-bit, or even 4-bit data first.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::在NPC中正确运行所有cpu-tests
> 有了基础设施的强大帮助, 你应该可以很容易地正确实现支持RV32E的NPC了. -->
> #### todo::Ensure all cpu-tests run correctly in NPC
> With the strong support of the infrastructure in place, you should be able to easily implement RV32E support in NPC and ensure that all cpu-tests run correctly.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### comment::RV32E不包含乘除指令, NPC如何正确运行包含乘除法操作的C程序?
> 这是因为RISC-V指令集是模块化的, gcc可以根据指令集是否包含M扩展决定如何编译乘除法操作.
> 若指令集中不包含M扩展, gcc将会把乘除法操作编译成形如`__mulsi3()`的函数调用,
> 这些函数用于提供整数算术运算操作的软件模拟版本, 即用加减操作计算出乘除法的结果.
> 这些函数声明可参考[这个页面][libgcc], 它们的函数体在函数库libgcc中,
> 通常在链接过程会将libgcc链接到ELF可执行文件中.
>
> 我们将libgcc中一些常见的整数乘除运算操作对应的软件模拟函数移植到`riscv32e-npc`中,
> 因此可以编译出不包含乘除法指令也能正确进行乘除法操作的ELF可执行文件.

[libgcc]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Integer-library-routines.html -->
> #### comment::How does NPC correctly execute C programs containing multiplication and division operations if RV32E does not include multiply and divide instructions?
> This is because the RISC-V instruction set is modular. GCC can determine how to compile multiplication and division operations based on whether the instruction set includes the M extension.
> If the instruction set does not include the M extension, GCC will compile multiplication and division operations into function calls such as `__mulsi3()`.
> These functions provide software simulation versions of integer arithmetic operations, computing multiplication and division results using addition and subtraction operations.
> The declarations of these functions can be found on [this page][libgcc]. Their function bodies reside in the libgcc library, which is typically linked into the ELF executable during the linking process.
>
> We have ported some common integer multiplication and division operations corresponding to software simulation functions from libgcc to `riscv32e-npc`.
> Therefore, ELF executables can be compiled without multiply and divide instructions while still correctly performing multiplication and division operations.

[libgcc]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Integer-library-routines.html

<!-- > #### caution::解放思想, 使用正确的工具做事情
> 有同学提出这样的疑问: 为什么要自己折腾verilator和Makefile这些, 明明用modelsim点一个按钮就好了.
> 这是因为, 仅仅使用波形进行调试, 并不是科学的方法.
> 对于`cpu-tests`这些规模很小的程序, 即使你坚持用波形调试, 你也可以存活下来;
> 但随着程序的规模越来越大, 调试效率将会越来越低:
> 如果仿真1亿个周期后出错, 你将要如何在波形中找到错误?
>
> 但大部分同学之前并未思考过如何提升调试的效率.
> 事实上, 这并不是因为大家没有能力(例如trace本质上就是一行`printf()`),
> 而是因为各种不专业的想法束缚了大家:
> * 我不是计算机系的, 软件跟我没关系
> * 我来写硬件的, 软件的部分随便糊弄一下就行
> * 现在公司都用quartus/vivado, "一生一芯"用verilator已经不符合时代发展的潮流
>
> 这些想法会让大家本能地拒绝接触软件领域的思想.
> 例如, 在龙芯杯比赛中, 成功启动Linux是系统展示环节的巅峰成果,
> 然而从比赛结果来看, 并不是每一支参赛队伍都能成功攀登这一巅峰.
> 但我们相信, 只要学会使用正确的工具, 人人都可以在合理的时间内在自己设计的CPU上成功启动Linux.
> 例如, 在时长为3个月的第三期"一生一芯"中, 就有一位之前从未设计过CPU的电子系同学,
> 以一人之力成功在自己的CPU上启动了Linux Debian.
> 事实上, 即使是写一个很小的脚本, 有时候都会大幅提升你的工作效率.
> 相比于坚持传统方法, 了解, 借鉴并吸收其它领域的先进方法, 可以让你变得更强大. -->
> #### caution::Liberate Your Thinking, Use the Right Tools for the Job
> Some students have raised the question: why bother with tools like Verilator and Makefile when you can simply click a button in ModelSim?
> This is because relying solely on waveform debugging is not a scientific approach.
> For small-scale programs like `cpu-tests`, you might survive with waveform debugging, but as programs grow larger, debugging efficiency decreases.
> If an error occurs after simulating one hundred million cycles, how will you find the error in the waveform?
>
> However, most students haven't thought about improving debugging efficiency.
> It's not because they lack the ability (for example, tracing is essentially a `printf()` statement), but rather because of various unprofessional ideas:
> * My major is not computer science, so software isn't relevant to me.
> * I'm here to work on hardware, so I can just gloss over the software part.
> * Nowadays, companies all use Quartus/Vivado, so using Verilator for "RISC-V: Make Your Own CPU" is outdated.
>
> These ideas instinctively deter people from engaging with software concepts.
> For instance, in the NSCSCC (National Student Computer System Capability Challenge), successfully booting Linux is the pinnacle achievement of the demonstration phase. > However, not every participating team manages to reach this pinnacle.
> But we believe that everyone can successfully boot Linux on their own designed CPU within a reasonable timeframe, as long as they learn to use the right tools. > For example, in the third session of "RISC-V: Make Your Own CPU," which lasted three months, there was a student from the electronics department who had never designed a CPU before,
> yet single-handedly managed to boot Linux Debian on their CPU.
> In fact, even writing a small script can significantly improve your work efficiency at times.
> Understanding, borrowing, and assimilating advanced methods from other fields can make you more powerful compared to sticking to traditional methods.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### flag::如果你是初学者, 现在可以来看看教科书上的架构图了
> 如果你是处理器设计的初学者, 尝试对比自己画的单周期处理器架构图与书上架构图的异同.
> 思考一下, 两者的架构孰优孰劣? 为什么? -->
> #### flag::If you are a beginner, now is a good time to look at the architecture diagram in the textbook
> If you are a beginner in processor design, try comparing the architecture diagram of the single-cycle processor you've drawn with the architecture diagram in the textbook. Consider the similarities and differences between the two.
> Reflect on which architecture is better or worse and why.
