<!-- ## 如何科学地提问 -->
[#](#how-to-ask-smart-questions) How to ask smart questions

<!-- > #### todo::阅读"提问的智慧"和"别像弱智一样提问", 编写读后感
> 你在预学习中的第一个任务, 就是现在仔细阅读[提问的智慧][how to ask]和[别像弱智一样提问][stop ask]这两篇文章,
> 结合自己过去提问和被提问的经历,
> 写一篇不少于800字的读后感, 谈谈你对"好的提问"以及"通过STFW和RTFM独立解决问题"的看法.
>
> 我们设置这道题并不是为了故意浪费大家的时间, 也不是为了禁止大家提出任何问题,
> 而是为了让大家知道"什么是正确的". 当你愿意为这些"正确的做法"去努力,
> 并且尝试用专业的方式提出问题的时候, 你就已经迈出了成为"成为专业人士"的第一步.

[how to ask]: https://github.com/ryanhanwu/How-To-Ask-Questions-The-Smart-Way/blob/master/README-zh_CN.md
[stop ask]: https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md -->

#### todo::Read "How To Ask Questions The Smart Way" and "Stop Ask Questions The Stupid Ways", and write an essay of your thoughts on them.

Your first task in the pre-study is to read the articles ["How To Ask Questions The Smart Way"](https://github.com/ryanhanwu/How-To-Ask-Questions-The-Smart-Way/blob/master/README-zh_CN.md) and ["Stop Ask Questions The Stupid Ways"](https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md) and [Don't Ask Like a Retard](https://github.com/tangx/Stop-Ask-Questions-The-Stupid-Ways/blob/master/README.md), and write an 800-word essay about your experience of asking and being asked questions, and what you think about "good questioning" and "Independent problem solving through STFW and RTFM".

This task is not intended to be a waste of time, nor is it intended to prohibit you from asking any questions, but it is intended to show you "what is the right thing to do". When you are willing to work on these "right things" and try to ask questions in a professional way, you have already taken the first step to become a "professional".

<!-- > #### todo::大佬三连: STFW, RTFM, RTFSC
> 尝试在上述文章中寻找并理解这三个缩写的含义.
>
> 你可能会觉得字母F冒犯了你, 但事实上这个字母的含义从来都不是重点,
> 它只是反映出这三个缩写背后的传奇色彩而更容易被大家记住而已.
> 例如, RTFSC起源于Linux之父Linus Torvalds在1991年4月1日回复邮件中的第一句话,
> 目前在网上还能搜到[当时的邮件列表][rtfsc mail].
> 有趣的是, Andrew S. Tanenbaum在[Lessons Learned from 30 Years of MINIX][minix]
> 一文中把这封邮件作为MINIX操作系统容易学习的一个例子:
> 还处于学生时代的Linus Torvalds在10天之内就把MINIX学得差不多了.

[rtfsc mail]: https://go-xyz.xyz/extdomains/groups.google.com/g/comp.os.minix/c/-QUZhUeDeko?pli=1
[minix]: https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/3/198874-lessons-learned-from-30-years-of-minix/fulltext -->

#### todo::STFW, RTFM, RTFSC

Try to find and understand the meanings of the three acronyms in the above article.

You may feel offended by the F word, but in fact the meaning of the F word is never the point, it just reflects the legend behind the three acronyms and makes them easier to remember. For example, RTFSC originated with the first words of Linus Torvalds, the father of Linux, in a reply to an email dated April 1, 1991, which is still available on the Internet mailing list. Interestingly, Andrew S. Tanenbaum, in [Lessons Learned from 30 Years of MINIX](https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/3/198874-lessons-learned-from-30-years-of-minix/fulltext) cites this e-mail as an example of how easy it was to learn the MINIX operating system: Linus Torvalds, as a student, learned MINIX in about 10 days.


<!-- > #### caution::与其说是学会提问, 倒不如说是学会不提问
> 很多同学不多不少都会抱有这样的观点:
> > 我向大佬请教, 大佬告诉我答案, 我就学习了.
>
> 但你是否想过, 将来你进入公司, 你的领导让你尝试一个技术方案;
> 或者是将来你进入学校的课题组, 你的导师让你探索一个新课题.
> 你可能会觉得: 到时候身边肯定有厉害的同事, 或者有师兄师姐来带我.
> 但实际情况是, 同事也要完成他的KPI, 师兄师姐也要做他们自己的课题,
> 没有人愿意被你一天到晚追着询问, 总有一天没有大佬告诉你答案, 你将要如何完成任务?
>
> 如果你觉得自己搞不定, 你很可能缺少<font color=red>独立解决问题的能力</font>.
>
> 但幸运的是, 这种能力是可以训练出来的.
> 你身边的大佬之所以成为了大佬, 是因为他们比你更早地锻炼出独立解决问题的能力:
> 当你还在向他们请教一个很傻的问题的时候, 他们早就解决过无数个奇葩问题了.
> 事实上, 你的能力是跟你独立解决问题的投入成正比的,
> 大佬告诉你答案, 展示的是大佬的能力, 并不是你的能力.
> 所以, 要锻炼出独立解决问题的能力, 更重要的是端正自己的心态:
> <font color=red>你来参加学习, 你就应该尽自己最大努力独立解决遇到的所有问题</font>
> (当然一些由于框架代码缺陷导致的问题除外). -->

#### caution::It's not so much learning to ask questions as it is learning not to ask questions.

Many students, more or less, have the illusion that.

> I asked a master for advice, he gave it to me, and I learned it.

But have you ever thought that in the future you will join a company and your leader will ask you to attempt a technical solution; or in the future you will join a school project team and your advisor will ask you to explore a new topic. You may think: I'll be surrounded by great coworkers, or I'll have senior colleagues to guide me. But the reality is that your coworkers have their own KPIs to fulfill, and your senior colleagues have their own projects to work on, and no one wants to be chased around by you asking questions, so how are you going to get things done when there is no master to tell you the answers one day?

If you don't think you can do it on your own, you probably lack the ability to solve problems on your own.

But fortunately, this ability can be trained. The masters they've developed their independent problem solving skills long before you did: they've solved a million weird problems while you've been asking them for advice on a stupid one. In fact, your ability to solve problems is directly proportional to your dedication to solving them independently, and when a master tells you the answer, it's a demonstration of the master's ability, not yours. Therefore, in order to develop independent problem solving ability, and more importantly, to correct your own mindset: you come to learn, you should do your best to solve all the problems encountered independently (of course, except for some due to the framework code defects).

<!-- > #### caution::我是一个很享受帮助别人的大佬
> 以南京大学令人闻风丧胆的PA实验为例, 我们见过太多这样的情况了:
> 每年学期开始的时候, 总有那么几位上一届的热心师兄在群里无微不至地解答新手同学的各种提问,
> 这些新手同学也确实在残酷的PA训练中感受到热心师兄为他们遮风挡雨的温暖.
> 但过了一两个月, 这些热心的师兄总是会突然消失, 留下这些新手同学在PA的寒风中彷徨地等待;
> 而另一部分同学早就在这一两个月的摸爬滚打中锻炼出正确的心态和技能,
> 成长为可以独当一面的专业人士, 在PA的鞭策下继续前行.
> 关于这些热心师兄突然消失的神秘原因, 我们不得而知,
> 也许是他们感受到自身的课业压力,
> 也许是他们对回答这些无尽的问题感到厌倦,
> 也许是他们突然觉得自己给新手同学提供的帮助其实帮不了他们.
> 但不管怎样, 那些新手同学已经无法独立完成PA的训练了,
> 因为他们将会面对比学期开始更困难的问题.
>
> 所以, 我们并不否认你在帮助同学的时候给你带来的成就感,
> 但我们认为, 有很多更严肃的问题需要思考:
> > 一个同学来提问, 如果说这个问题只是表象的话, 你能摸索出更本质的问题吗?
> >
> > 当一个同学不来询问你就无法解决问题的时候, 你之前所做的真的是在帮助他吗?
> >
> > 更重要地, 你能为这些同学的将来负责吗?
>
> 如果要问"你希望这位同学成长为什么样子", 我想大家的目标都是一致的:
> 希望他将来能成为可以独当一面的专业人士.
> 但同时你也需要认识到学习的规律: <font color=red>这是需要长期接受专业训练的</font>.
> 如果你仅仅把问题的答案告诉他, 他就可以成为专业人士,
> 那该如何对得起长年累月奋斗在一线的广大资深工程师们流下的汗水?
>
> 因此, <font color=red>你每一次直接把答案告诉他,
> 直接帮他们解决问题, 都是在剥夺他接受专业训练的机会.</font>
> 相反, 如果你真的希望能帮助他, 你可以尝试在不影响他训练的情况下指出他缺少的观念和技能,
> 该查资料/看手册/看代码, 就让他去查资料/看手册/看代码,
> 引导他针对问题提出自己的思考, 然后尝试并总结解决方案.
> 这对你和他来说都不容易, 但学习本身就是一件需要付出的事情:
> 如果你让他很方便地获得问题的答案, 那他就不能从解决这个问题的过程中收获应有的训练. -->

#### caution::I'm a master who enjoys helping others

Take Nanjing University's terrifying PA course as an example, we have seen too many situations like this: at the beginning of each semester, there are always a few enthusiastic senior students from the previous semester answering all kinds of questions for novice students, and these novice students do feel the warmth of the enthusiastic senior students shielding them from the wind and rain during the brutal PA training. However, after a month or two, these enthusiastic mentors would suddenly disappear, leaving these newbies waiting in the cold wind of PA; while some other students would have already developed the right mindset and skills during the month or two, and grown into professionals who can take charge of their own business, and continue to move forward under the encouragement of PA. We don't know the mysterious reasons for the sudden disappearance of these enthusiastic seniors, maybe they felt the pressure of their own school work, maybe they got tired of answering these endless questions, or maybe they suddenly felt that the help they provided to the newbies was not really helping them. But whatever the case, the novice students will no longer be able to complete their PA training on their own, as they will be faced more difficult questions than they were at the beginning of the semester, only now they are finally on their own.

So, while we don't deny you the sense of fulfillment that comes from helping your fellow classmates, we think there are a lot more serious issues to think about:

> what if some student asked a simply question, can you drill down to the root cause of it?
> 
> When a student can't solve a problem without asking you, is what you did before really helping them?
> 
> More importantly, can you take responsibility for the future of these students?

If you ask "what do you want this student to be like", I think we all have the same goal: to let them become a professional in the future. But at the same time, you need to realize that learning is a long term process. If you just tell him the answer to a question and he becomes a professional, how can you justify the sweat of the senior engineers who have been working on the front line for years?

So, every time you give them an answer, every time you help them solve a problem, you are depriving them of the opportunity to receive professional training. Instead, if you really want to help them you can try to point out the missing concepts and skills without interfering with their training, let them do the research/read the manual/look at the code if they need to, guide them to come up with their own thinking about the problem, and then try to summarize the solution indenpendently. It's not easy for you or for them, but learning is a costly process: if you make it easy for them to get the answer to a problem, then they won't get the training they need by solving the problem.

#### Channels for asking questions

*   Group chat (recommendation), the more active students can hopefully be developed into teaching assistants. [Discord Server](https://discord.gg/dKyq46VeSQ)
*   Private chat with TAs (TAs also have other work commitments and may not be able to respond in a timely manner)

Last Updated:

Contributors: Zihao Yu, myyerrol, Yifei Fang

[Overview of pre-study](/docs/2306/prestudy/prestudy.html) [Linux OS installation and basic usage](/docs/2306/prestudy/0.2.html)
