<!-- ## Linux系统安装和基本使用 -->
[#](#linux-system-installation-and-basic-usage) Linux system installation and basic usage

<!-- > #### todo:: 安装一个Linux操作系统
> 我们复用PA讲义的内容, 请大家根据[PA0][pa0]安装Linux操作系统.

[pa0]: /ics-pa/PA0.html -->

#### todo::Install a Linux operating system

We're going to reuse the contents of the PA handout, and we're going to ask you to follow [PA0](/docs/ics-pa/PA0.html) to install Linux OS

<!-- > #### todo:: 获取"一生一芯"框架代码
> 当你阅读PA0讲义, 并进行到获取PA框架代码的部分, 将会有提示框请你返回到此处的讲义内容.
>
> 首先请你在github上添加一个ssh key, 具体操作请STFW.
> 然后通过以下命令获取"一生一芯"的框架代码:
> ```
> git clone -b ysyx2204 git@github.com:OSCPU/ysyx-workbench.git
> ```
> 获取后, 你就可以回到PA讲义的相应位置, 继续阅读了.
> 不过你还需要注意:
> * 请把`ysyx-workbench`作为PA讲义中的项目目录, 即将PA讲义中的`ics2022`看成是`ysyx-workbench`
> * 修改`ysyx-workbench/Makefile`中的学号和姓名时, 请使用"一生一芯"的学号和真实姓名
>
> 这种来回跳转的做法可能会给你带来一些麻烦, 但我们之所以这样做, 是希望把文档看作代码来管理:
> 我们希望做到类似`"一生一芯"讲义调用PA讲义`的效果,
> 因此我们在PA讲义中尽可能少地提到"一生一芯", 而把"一生一芯"的相关内容都放到"一生一芯"本身的讲义中.
> 如果不遵守这条原则, 不仅会使我们维护讲义时感到困难, 而且大家阅读讲义时也不知道应该到哪里寻找相关的内容. -->

#### todo::Get "ysyx" code framework

When you read the PA0 handout and proceed to the section on getting the PA framework code, you will be prompted with a box asking you to return to the content of the handout here.

First of all, please add a ssh key on github, please STFW on how to do that. Then get the framework code of "ysyx" by the following command:

    git clone -b master git@github.com:OSCPU/ysyx-workbench.git
    

Once you have it, you can go back to the appropriate place in the PA handout and continue reading. But you should also note that.

* Please use `ysyx-workbench` as the project directory in the PA handout, i.e. replace occurance of `ics2022` in the PA handout with `ysyx-workbench`.
* When change the student number and name in `ysyx-workbench/Makefile`, you can leave the student number unchanged until you have completed the pre-study.

This jumping back and forth may cause you some trouble, but the reason we do it this way is that we want to manage the documentation as if it were code: we want to do something like "The ysyx handout calls the PA handout", so we mention as little as possible about the ysyx project in the PA handout, and put all the ysyx content in the ysyx handout itself. Failure to follow this principle not only makes it difficult for us to maintain the handouts, but also makes it difficult for people to know where to look for relevant content when reading the handouts.

<!-- > #### danger::安装系统是独立解决问题的最简单的训练
> 如果你是第一次安装并使用Linux, 你可能会遇到非常多的问题.
> 不用担心, 因为全世界都在使用Linux, 因此你遇到的问题, 很大概率别人也遇到过,
> 在互联网上搜索关键字, 很大概率就能找到解决方案. -->

#### danger::Installing an OS is the easiest training for independent problem solving

If you are installing and using Linux for the first time, you may encounter a lot of problems. Don't worry, since Linux is used all over the world, there is a high probability that the problems you have encountered have been encountered by other people, and searching for keywords on the Internet will most likely lead you to a solution.

<!-- > #### caution::树立正确的价值观, 接受最大程度的训练
> 事实上, 你总能耍些小聪明来绕过这些训练, 例如
> * 直接使用别人提供的虚拟机镜像或者一键安装配置的脚本, 瞬间完成本小节的任务
> * 在网上搜到了所谓的PA攻略, 心里暗暗窃喜
> * 找大佬要到了关键代码或者往期代码, 美言曰学习
>
> 有同学会觉得, "凭什么不能参考别人的攻略和代码? 我都看懂了啊!"
> 但从训练的角度来说, <font color=red>"看懂"和"自己独立完成"的效果是天差地别的</font>:
> 你知道大佬为什么要这样做, 而不是那样做吗?
> 大佬踩过了多少坑, 这些坑背后是什么道理, 你能看出来吗?
> 相比于这些几乎躺倒就可以得到的"好处", 你更应该去想一下, 这会让你失去什么.
> "能抄对也是本事"这种主动降低自己要求的观点, 并不符合我们所提倡的价值观.
>
> 事实上, 如果你是初学者, 这些小聪明会给你的训练带来毁灭性的伤害:
> * 你参考了这些在这个阶段不应该参考的内容, 它们就会成为你学习的上界,
>   因为你几乎不清楚它们哪里不好, 从而使得你几乎不会做得比它们更好
> * 而且这会让你产生"我学得很好, 我善于学习"的错觉, 你就不会去尝试, 也不知道如何才能做得更好
> * 更严重地, 你现在得不到应有的训练, 但将来总要面对那些没有攻略或者参考代码的新问题, 你自然也就无法解决它们
>
> 但说实话, 助教团队几乎不存在有效的方法来禁止大家耍这些小聪明.
> 其实, <font color=green>这更多是需要大家发自内心去认可和执行的</font>:
> 当你搜到了一些所谓攻略的时候, 你心里应该想到"阅读它们会降低训练的效果",
> 然后你主动拒绝它们的诱惑, 坚持自己独立完成实验内容.
> 这和大家自觉遵守学术诚信是很类似的:
> 你心里清楚考试作弊是不对的, 然后自发地独立完成考试题目.
>
> 事实上, 学术诚信远远不止考试不作弊,
> 我们推荐大家阅读一下[MIT对学术诚信的诠释][integrity],
> 尤其是[关于写代码的学术诚信][coding integrity].
> 在这里, 我们引用其中的一些示例说法(当然我们还是建议大家阅读原版的英文描述):
> * 当讲义要求"实现X"的时候, 你必须在不复用任何外部资源的情况下独立实现X
> * 分享代码和交换测试用例都是不合适的
>
> 你也许会觉得这些奇葩的要求颠覆了你的三观,
> 但这些准则归根到底是为了让你可以获得预期的训练效果:
> 不要忘记你是在通过学习提升自己的能力, 而不是交付项目.
> 如果你能够坚持下来, 你就能成为真正的专业人士.

[integrity]: http://integrity.mit.edu/
[coding integrity]: http://integrity.mit.edu/handbook/writing-code -->

#### caution::Establishing the right values and maximizing the training you get.

In fact, you can always get around these drills with a little ingenuity, such as

*   Use someone else's VM image or a one-click install and configuration script to accomplish the tasks in this subsection in a snap.
*   Found the so-called PA guide on the Internet and happy that you don't need to study yourself.
*   Getting the core code or code for previous ysyx cohort from someone and call that study

Some students will think, "Why can't I refer to other people's guides and codes? I know what I'm doing!" But from the training point of view, "understand" and "independent completion" is very different: do you know why the masters do this, rather than that? How many potholes have the masters stepped in, and what is the rationale behind these potholes, can you see it? You should think about what you have to lose as opposed to what you have to gain by just laying down and copying. The notion that "copying the right thing is a good thing" is a way of lowering your expectations is not in line with the values we are promoting.

In fact, if you're a beginner, these little witticisms can cause devastating damage to your training:

*   You're referencing things that you shouldn't be referencing at this stage, and they become the upper boundary of your learning, because you're barely aware of what's wrong with them, which makes it almost impossible for you to do better than them
*   And it gives you the illusion that "I'm a good learner, I'm good at learning," and you don't try, and you don't know how to do it better.
*   Worse, you don't get the training you need now, but in the future you'll always be faced with new problems for which there's no cheat sheet or reference code, and you won't be able to solve them.

But to be honest, the TA team has almost no effective way to prohibit people from playing smart. In fact, it's more a matter of recognizing and enforcing them from the bottom of your heart: when you find some so-called cheat sheets, you should think to yourself that "reading them will reduce the effectiveness of the training", and then you voluntarily reject their temptation and insist on completing the experiments on your own. It's similar to the way we all recognize academic integrity: you know it's wrong to cheat on an exam, and then you take it upon yourself to complete the exam independently.

Indeed, academic integrity goes far beyond not cheating on exams, and we recommend reading [MIT's interpretation of academic integrity](http://integrity.mit.edu/), especially [Academic integrity in writing code](http://integrity.mit.edu/handbook/writing- code). Here, we quote some sample statements.

*   When the handout asks to "implement X", you must implement X independently without reusing any external resources.
*   Sharing code and exchanging test cases are both inappropriate

You may think these requirements are out of line, but these guidelines are ultimately designed to get you the results you want: don't forget that you're learning to improve, not delivering a program. If you stick with it, you can become a true professional.

<!-- > #### info::PA习题课资源
> [jyy][jyy]在学校给大家上过[PA习题课][ics-jyywiki], 并把ics2020的录播上传到[B站][bilibili].
> 我们会给大家按照PA的实验进度推荐相应的资源帮助大家学习.
> 不过, 你不要指望可以从这些资源中直接得到答案;
> 更重要的是, jyy会引导大家学会面向系统编程: 其中的观念和方法比答案本身重要得多.
> 此外, 随着实验版本的演进, PA中的内容已经不能100%与ics2020的资源保持一致了,
> 不过观念和方法都是相通的, 上jyy的课仍然可以给你带来很大的启发.
>
> 本阶段相关资源:
> * 课件: [The Missing Course of Your CS Education][ics2020-jyy-slide-1]

[jyy]: http://ics.nju.edu.cn/~jyy
[ics-jyywiki]: http://jyywiki.cn/ICS/2020/
[bilibili]: https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1qa4y1j7xk/
[ics2020-jyy-slide-1]: http://jyywiki.cn/ICS/2020/slides/1.slides -->

<!-- > #### comment::我能否使用其它Linux发行版?
> 我们不会强制规定必须使用什么样的Linux发行版,
> 因此经常有同学提出类似"使用xxx发行版是否会对实验造成影响"的问题.
> 首先请阅读PA0中关于发行版的提示,
> 除此之外, 我们大概率无法给出确切的答复, 因为我们大概率没用过.
>
> 事实上, 如果你决定使用其它发行版, 你就应该做好解决新问题的准备. -->

#### comment::Can I use other Linux distributions?
We don't make it mandatory to use a particular Linux distribution, so we often get questions like "will using xxx distro affect my experiments". First of all, please read the tips on distributions in PA0, but otherwise we probably can't give you a definitive answer, because we probably haven't used it.

In fact, if you decide to use a different distribution, you should be prepared to solve new problems on your own.

<!-- > #### todo::学习Linux基本使用
> 我们给大家墙裂推荐MIT的Linux工具使用系列课程: [The Missing Semester of Your CS Education][missing].
> 通过学习这些课程, 你将会了解到如何使用Linux中的工具来方便地完成各种任务,
> 这将大大提升你的工作效率.
>
> 在上述课程中, 你需要完成除了`Security and Cryptography`之外的所有内容,
> 包括阅读讲义并完成课后习题.
> 此外, [B站上][missing bilibili]有这门公开课的视频供大家参考.

[missing]: https://missing.csail.mit.edu/
[missing bilibili]: https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1x7411H7wa -->

#### todo::Learning basic Linux usage
We recommend MIT's Linux Tools Series: [The Missing Semester of Your CS Education](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/). By taking these courses, you will learn how to use the tools in Linux to easily accomplish various tasks, which will greatly improve your work efficiency.

**Mandatory Questions**:

* Course overview and shell
* Shell tools and scripts
* Editor (Vim)
* Data organization
* Command line environment
* Version control (Git)

Includes reading handouts and completing post-course exercises. In addition, [Lecture Video](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/) is here for reference.

<!-- > #### info::命令行的艺术
> [The Art of Command Line][cmd]这篇文章总结了很多常用的命令行工具, 也值得大家去阅读.

[cmd]: https://github.com/jlevy/the-art-of-command-line -->

#### info::The Art of Command Line
[The Art of Command Line](https://github.com/jlevy/the-art-of-command-line) This article summarizes a number of commonly used command line tools and is worth reading.
