<!-- # B1 总线 -->
# B1 Bus

<!-- 你已经设计了单周期处理器NPC, 也了解了设备如何工作.
不过我们之前是让仿真环境来提供设备的功能,
现在是时候从硬件上实现NPC与其他设备通信的功能了. -->

You've designed the single-cycle processor NPC, and you understand how devices work.
But we've let the simulation environment provide the functionality of the device, 
Now it's time to implement NPC - devices communication in hardware.

<!-- 计算机中每个模块并非独立工作, 不同的模块之间需要进行数据交换:
CPU和内存控制器之间, 内存控制器和内存颗粒之间,
取指单元和译码单元之间等等,都需要通过一套约定的协议进行通信.
软件同样如此, 在我们使用的DiffTest中, NEMU需要与Spike通信, NPC也需要与NEMU通信才能实现相应的功能. -->

In a computer, each module does not work independently; data exchange is required between different modules: between the CPU and the memory controller, between the memory controller and the memory chips, between the instruction fetch unit and the decode unit, etc. Communication between these modules must be conducted through a set of agreed-upon protocols. The same is true for software. In the DiffTest tool that we use, NEMU needs to communicate with Spike, and NPC also needs to communicate with NEMU to implement the corresponding functions.

<!-- 从广义上来说, 总线其实就是一个通信系统, 用来在不同的模块之间进行数据传输.
我们接下来将聚焦于硬件, 介绍狭义的总线, 即硬件模块间的通信协议. -->

In a broad sense, a bus is a communication system used to transfer data between different modules.
We will now focus on the hardware and introduce the bus in a narrower sense, i.e. the communication protocols between hardware modules.

<!-- ## 总线 - 硬件模块间的通信协议 -->
# Bus - Communication Protocols Between Hardware Modules

<!-- 我们先从处理器内部的模块通信开始, 理解总线协议的一般构成. -->
We will start with communication between modules inside the processor to understand the general organization of bus protocols.

<!-- ### 最简单的总线 -->
### The Simplest Bus

<!-- NPC中包含取指单元IFU和译码单元IDU, 两个单元间需要进行通信, 将指令由IFU传递给IDU. -->
In your NPC, there is an Instruction Fetch Unit (IFU) and an Instruction Decode Unit (IDU), and these two units need to communicate to transfer instructions from the IFU to the IDU.

```
+-----+           +-----+
| IFU | inst ---> | IDU |
+-----+           +-----+
```

<!-- 在这个简单的场景其实就隐含了总线协议:
一般称主动发起通信的模块为master(主设备), 称响应通信的模块为slave(从设备).
在上述的简单交互场景中, 作为master的IFU向作为slave的IDU发送信息, 发送的信息为当前的指令.
作为单周期处理器, 显然, 二者的通信实际上隐含了如下约定:
* 每个周期master都向slave发送有效信息
* master一旦发送有效信息, slave能够立刻收到 -->

In this simple scenario, there is an implied bus protocol:
the module that initiates communication is generally called the master, and the module that responds to communication is called the slave.
In the simple interaction scenario above, the IFU, as the master, sends information to the IDU, which is the slave, with the information being the current instruction.
As a single-cycle processor, obviously, their communication actually implies the following agreement:
* Every cycle, the master sends valid information to the slave.
* Once the master sends valid information, the slave can receive it immediately.

<!-- ### 异步总线 -->
### Asynchronous Bus

<!-- 但如果IFU不能保证每个周期都能取到指令, 此时IDU需要等待IFU完成取指.
这种情况下, 就需要在通信内容中增加一个有效信号`valid`, 来指示IFU何时向IDU发送有效的指令.
通信协议也需要更新如下:
* 只有在`valid`信号有效时才认为信息有效
* master一旦发送有效信息, slave能够立刻收到 -->

However, if the IFU cannot guarantee to fetch an instruction every cycle, then the IDU needs to wait for the IFU to complete the instruction fetch.
In this case, it is necessary to add a `valid` signal to the communication content to indicate when the IFU sends a valid instruction to the IDU.
The communication protocol also needs to be updated as follows:
* Information is considered valid only when the `valid` signal is valid.
* Once the master sends valid information, it is considered received by the slave immediately.

```
+-----+ inst  ---> +-----+
| IFU | valid ---> | IDU |
+-----+            +-----+
```

<!-- 那么, 如何避免让IDU执行无效指令呢?
回想一下处理器的状态机模型, 我们只要在指令无效时让处理器的状态保持不变即可.
在电路层次, 状态就是时序逻辑元件, 因此, 只需在指令无效时将时序逻辑元件的写使能置为无效即可. -->

So, how do we prevent the IDU from executing invalid instructions?
Recalling the state machine model of the processor, we just need to keep the processor's state unchanged when the instruction is invalid.
At the circuit level, the state is the sequential logic components, therefore, we just need to set the write enable of the sequential logic components to invalid when the instruction is invalid.

<!-- 再进一步, 假设有些指令的译码操作过于复杂, IDU需要多个周期才能译码一条指令.
在这种假设下, 当IFU成功取到一条指令时, IDU可能还未完成上条指令的译码,
这时IFU应该先等待IDU完成当前的译码工作, 再向IDU发送下一条指令.
为了实现让IFU等待的功能, 就需要在通信内容中增加一个就绪信号`ready`, 来指示IDU何时能接收下一条指令.
通信协议也需要更新如下:
* 只有在`valid`信号有效时才认为信息有效
* master发送的信息, 只有在`ready`信号有效时才认为slave收到 -->

Further, suppose some instructions are too complex to decode, and the IDU needs multiple cycles to decode a single instruction.
Under this assumption, when the IFU successfully fetches an instruction, the IDU may not have finished decoding the previous instruction,
At this time, the IFU should wait for the IDU to complete the current decoding work before sending the next instruction to the IDU.
To implement the function of making the IFU wait, it is necessary to add a `ready` signal to the communication content to indicate when the IDU can receive the next instruction.
The communication protocol also needs to be updated as follows:
* Information is considered valid only when the `valid` signal is set.
* The information sent by the master is considered received by the slave only when the `ready` signal is set.

```
+-----+ inst  ---> +-----+
| IFU | valid ---> | IDU |
+-----+ <--- ready +-----+
```

<!-- 这实际上就是异步总线, 两个模块之间何时发生通信是无法提前预知的, 只有在`valid`和`ready`均有效时才发生.
`valid`和`ready`均有效, 也称为"握手", 表示master和slave对信息的成功传递达成共识.
显然, 这种通信协议更加灵活, master和slave将根据自身的工作情况决定何时发送或接收消息.
在`valid`信号有效, 而`ready`信号无效时, IFU需要等待IDU就绪, 此时IFU应暂存将要发送的信息, 以防止信息丢失. -->

This actually refers to an asynchronous bus, where it is unpredictable when communication between the two modules will occur; it only happens when both `valid` and `ready` signals are set.
Both signals being set, also known as a "handshake," indicates that the master and slave have reached a consensus on the successful transmission of information.
Clearly, this communication protocol is more flexible, allowing the master and slave to decide when to send or receive messages based on their own work situations.
When the `valid` signal is set and the `ready` signal is not set, the IFU needs to wait for the IDU to be ready. At this time, the IFU should temporarily store the information to be sent to prevent loss of information.

<!-- ### 异步总线的RTL实现 -->
### The RTL (Register Transfer Level) implementation of an asynchronous bus

<!-- 异步总线通过握手协议确定何时通信, 在RTL层次, 它主要由接口信号和通信逻辑这两部分组成. -->
The asynchronous bus determines when to communicate through a handshake protocol. At the RTL level, it mainly consists of two parts: interface signals and communication logic.

<!-- 接口信号即需要在模块间传递的信号, 如上述例子中的`inst`, `valid`和`ready`信号.
Chisel提供了Decoupled模板, 自带`valid`和`ready`, 通过元编程可以轻松实现异步总线接口: -->

Interface signals are the signals that need to be transmitted between modules, such as the `inst`, `valid`, and `ready` signals in the example above.
Chisel provides a Decoupled template, which comes with `valid` and `ready`, and asynchronous bus interfaces can be easily implemented through meta-programming:

```scala
class Message extends Bundle {
  val inst = Output(UInt(32.W))
}

class IFU extends Module {
  val io = IO(new Bundle { val out = Decoupled(new Message) })
  // ...
}
class IDU extends Module {
  val io = IO(new Bundle { val in = Flipped(Decoupled(new Message)) })
  // ...
}
```

<!-- 需要传递更多信息时, 也能很方便地增加信号, 这就是抽象带来的好处! -->
When more information needs to be transmitted, it is also very convenient to add signals. This is the benefit brought by abstraction!

```diff
 class Message extends Bundle {
   val inst = Output(UInt(32.W))
+  val pc = Output(UInt(32.W))
 }
```

<!-- 接下来是通信逻辑, 也即如何用电路实现上述总线协议.
协议是master和slave双方之间的约定, 而在电路上真正需要实现的, 是双方在遵守这一约定之下的行为.
也即, 双方根据握手信号的不同情况, 进入不同的状态, 从而采取不同的操作. 这就是状态机!
对于master而言, 我们可以很容易画出它的状态转移图. -->

Next is the communication logic, which is how to implement the bus protocol with circuits.
The protocol is an agreement between the master and the slave, and what really needs to be implemented in the circuit is the behavior of both modules while adhering to this agreement.
That is, both modules enter different states based on the different conditions of the handshake signals, thereby taking different actions. This is the state machine!
For the master, we can easily draw its state transition diagram:

```
   +-+ valid = 0
   | v         valid = 1
1. idle ----------------> 2. wait_ready <-+
   ^                          |      |    | ready = 0
   +--------------------------+      +----+
              ready = 1
```

<!-- 具体地:
1. 一开始处于空闲状态`idle`, 将`valid`置为无效
   1. 如果不需要发送消息, 则一直处于`idle`状态
   1. 如果需要发送消息, 则将`valid`置为有效, 并进入`wait_ready`状态, 等待slave就绪
1. 在`wait_ready`状态中,  同时检测slave的`ready`信号
   1. 如果`ready`信号有效, 则握手成功, 返回`idle`状态
   1. 如果`ready`信号无效, 则继续处于`wait_ready`状态等待 -->

Specifically:
1. Initially in the `idle` state, unset `valid` signal
   1. If there is no need to send a message, remain in the `idle` state
   1. If a message needs to be sent, transition to the `wait_ready` state and wait for the slave to be ready
1. In the `wait_ready` state,  detect the slave's `ready` signal
   1. If the `ready` signal is set, the handshake is successful, return to the idle state
   1. If the `ready` signal is unset, continue to stay in the `wait_ready` state and wait

<!-- 根据状态转移图, 我们就可以很容易写出相应的RTL代码了.
这里也给出了一段简单的Chisel代码供大家参考: -->

With the state transition diagram, we can easily write the corresponding RTL.
Here is a simple Chisel code snippet for reference:

```scala
class IFU extends Module {
  val io = IO(new Bundle { val out = Decoupled(new Message) })

  val s_idle :: s_wait_ready :: Nil = Enum(2)
  val state = RegInit(s_idle)
  state := MuxLookup(state, s_idle)(List(
    s_idle       -> Mux(io.out.valid, s_wait_ready, s_idle),
    s_wait_ready -> Mux(io.out.ready, s_idle, s_wait_ready)
  ))

  io.out.valid := instruction need to be send
  // ...
}
```

<!-- > #### question::用RTL实现IDU的通信
> 理解IFU通信的实现过程之后, 尝试分析并画出IDU的状态转移图, 并写出IDU通信的RTL代码.
> 这只是一个总线的练习, 目前你不必修改NPC中IDU的代码. -->

> #### question::Implementing IDU Communication in RTL
> After understanding the implementation process of IFU communication, try to analyze and draw the state transition diagram of IDU, and write the RTL code for IDU communication.
> This is just an exercise about bus, you don't need to modify the IDU code in your NPC at the moment.

<!-- 当我们完整实现IFU和IDU的通信逻辑后, 上述总线协议也就实现好了. -->
When we fully implement the communication logic of both IFU and IDU, the above bus protocol will also be effectively implemented.

<!-- ## 总线视角下的处理器设计 -->
## Processor Design from a Bus Perspective

<!-- 我们可以从总线角度来重新审视处理器设计本身.
假设处理器包含4个模块, 各模块之间需要进行通信:
IFU向IDU发送指令, IDU将译码结果发送给EXU, EXU将计算结果发送给WBU. -->

We can reconsider the processor design itself from a bus perspective.
Assuming the processor consists of 4 modules that need to communicate with each other:
IFU sends instructions to IDU, IDU sends the decoded results to EXU, EXU sends the computation results to WBU.

```
+-----+ inst  ---> +-----+  ...  ---> +-----+  ...  ---> +-----+
| IFU | valid ---> | IDU | valid ---> | EXU | valid ---> | WBU |
+-----+ <--- ready +-----+ <--- ready +-----+ <--- ready +-----+
```

<!-- 在这个视角下, 不同微结构的处理器实际上只是模块间的通信协议不同:
* 对于单周期处理器, 相当于每个周期上游发送的消息都有效, 同时下游处于就绪状态来接收新消息
* 对于多周期处理器, 上游模块空闲时消息无效, 下游模块忙碌时不接收新消息; IFU收到WBU的完成信号后再取下一条指令
  * 和传统课本不同, 这是一个基于消息控制的分布式多周期处理器,
    其中的"分布式"体现在: 两个模块能否互相通信只取决于二者的状态, 和其他模块无关 -->

From this perspective, different microarchitectures of processors essentially represent varying communication protocols between modules:
* For a single-cycle processor, it is bascially every message sent by the upstream being valid each cycle, while the downstream remains ready to receive new messages.
* For a multi-cycle processor, messages are invalid when the upstream module is idle, and new messages are not accepted when the downstream module is busy. The IFU fetches the next instruction only after receiving the completion signal from WBU.
  * Unlike traditional textbooks, this is a message-controlled distributed multi-cycle processor,
    where the "distributed" aspect lies in: whether two modules can communicate with each other solely depends on their states, independent of other modules.

<!-- > #### info::课本上的多周期处理器
> 在多周期处理器中, 一条指令被划分为不同的阶段, 并在不同的周期中执行, 因此每条指令都需要花费多个时钟周期:
> * 在第1个周期, IFU取指令并将指令传递到IDU
> * 在第2个周期, IDU将译码结果传递给EXU
> * 在第3个周期, EXU将计算结果传递给WBU
> * 在第4个周期, WBU将结果写回寄存器堆
> * 在下一个周期, IFU再取出下一条指令... -->

> #### info::Multi-cycle Processor in Textbooks
> In a multi-cycle processor, an instruction is divided into different stages and executed in different cycles, hence each instruction takes multiple clock cycles to complete:
> * In the 1st cycle, IFU fetches the instruction and passes it to IDU
> * In the 2nd cycle, IDU sends the decoded result to EXU
> * In the 3rd cycle, EXU passes the computation result to WBU
> * In the 4th cycle, WBU writes back the result to the register file
> * In the next cycle, IFU fetches the next instruction...

<!-- * 对于流水线处理器, 则可以让IFU一直取指, 同时每个模块只要有消息处理完成, 就在每个周期都尝试向下游发送消息
* 对于乱序执行处理器, 则可以看成在流水线的基础上进行很小的扩展:
  每一个下游模块中都有一个队列, 上游模块只需把消息发送到队列中, 就可以不用关心下游队列的状态继续工作 -->

* For a pipelined processor, IFU can continuously fetch instructions, and each module attempts to send messages downstream every cycle as soon as it completes processing any message.
* For an out-of-order execution processor, it can be seen as a minor extension of the pipeline:
  Each downstream module has a queue, and the upstream module only needs to send messages to the queue without worrying about the state of the downstream queue.

<!-- 通常, 集中式控制需要有一个全局的控制器, 负责收集所有模块的状态, 再根据这些状态来控制各个模块的下一步工作.
传统课本中介绍的多周期处理器, 通常是一个基于大状态机的集中式多周期处理器.
它通过全局的大状态机来收集每个模块的状态, 从而控制每个模块之间的通信, 并确定下一个状态应该是什么.
例如在当前周期IFU取指完成, 那下一个周期就应该进入译码状态, 并控制IDU进行译码. -->

Usually, centralized control requires a global controller responsible for collecting the states of all modules and then using these states to control the next steps of each module.
The multi-cycle processor typically introduced in traditional textbooks is often a centralized multi-cycle processor based on a large state machine.
It collects the states of each module through a global state machine to control communication between each module and determine what the next state should be.
For example, if instruction fetching is completed in the current cycle, then in the next cycle, it should enter the decoding state and control IDU to perform decoding.

```
                   +--------------+
   +-------------> |  Controller  | <--------------+
   |               +--------------+                |
   |                ^            ^                 |
   v                v            v                 v
+-----+  inst   +-----+   ...   +-----+   ...   +-----+
| IFU | ------> | IDU | ------> | EXU | ------> | WBU |
+-----+         +-----+         +-----+         +-----+
```

<!-- 课本上通常只通过少数几条指令来介绍多周期状态机的基本原理, 这时问题并不大.
但集中式控制的可扩展性比较低, 随着模块的数量还有复杂度的提升, 控制器的设计会越来越复杂:
* 随着指令数量增加, 指令的类别也会增加, 这个集中式状态机需要考虑每一类指令执行的所有阶段
* 如果想在这个处理器中插入一个新阶段, 就需要重新设计控制器
* 在真实的处理器中, 每个模块的工作时间可能各不相同
  * IFU取指可能存在延迟
  * 而IDU可能只需要一个周期就能完成译码
  * 在EXU中, 不同指令的执行时间可能各不相同
    * RVI中的整数运算指令通常只需要一个周期就能完成计算
    * 除法通常需要执行很久
    * 乘法可能更快一些, 但可能也需要数个周期
    * 访存指令需要等待的时间无法提前预知
* 一些指令的执行可能会触发异常, 中断也可能会随时到来 -->

In textbooks, usually only a few instructions are used to introduce the basic principles of multi-cycle state machines, which is not a big deal.
However, the scalability of centralized control is relatively low. As the number of modules and complexity increase, the design of the controller becomes more complex:
* With an increase in the number of instructions, the types of instructions also increase. The centralized state machine needs to consider all stages of execution for each type of instruction.
* Inserting a new stage in this processor would require a redesign of the controller.
* In real processors, the working time of each module may vary:
  * Instruction fetching in IFU may have delays.
  * IDU may complete decoding in just one cycle.
  * In EXU, different instructions may have varying execution times:
    * Integer arithmetic instructions in RVI typically complete calculations in one cycle.
    * Division usually takes a long time.
    * Multiplication might be faster but could still take several cycles.
    * Memory access instructions have unpredictable wait times.
* The execution of some instructions may trigger exceptions, and interrupts can arrive at any time.

<!-- 在这种复杂场景中, 需要考虑每个模块不同状态的组合, 统一的决策是很困难的. -->
In such complex scenarios, considering the combination of different states for each module, making unified decisions becomes very challenging.

<!-- 而上文提到的分布式控制中, 每个模块的行为只取决于自身和下游模块的状态, 每个模块可以独立工作.
例如在乱序执行处理器中, 上游模块可以一直工作, 直到下游模块中的队列满为止.
在分布式控制中, 能够非常容易插入一个新模块, 只需要修改该模块的上下游模块的接口实现即可.
因此, 分布式控制具有更好的可扩展性. -->

In the distributed control mentioned earlier, where each module's behavior depends only on its own state and the state of downstream modules, each module can work independently.
For example, in an out-of-order execution processor, the upstream module can continue working until the downstream queue is full.
In distributed control, it is very easy to insert a new module; you only need to modify the implementation of the interface of its upstream and downstream modules.
Therefore, distributed control offers better scalability.

<!-- 采用这种基于握手的分布式控制, 可以统一不同微结构的处理器的设计.
此外, 乱序执行处理器天生就是分布式控制的, 这是因为乱序执行处理器中的模块和每个模块的状态都非常多,
且随时可能到来一些不同的事件(如中断到来, 流水线阻塞等),
如果采用集中式控制, 我们几乎无法保证控制器能在每个模块发生不同事件时都做出正确的决策. -->

By adopting this handshake-based distributed control, the design of different microarchitectures of processors can be unified.
Furthermore, out-of-order execution processors are inherently distributed control systems because they have many modules and states for each module, and various events can occur at any time (such as interrupts or pipeline stalls),
if centralized control were used, it would be nearly impossible to ensure that the controller makes correct decisions for each module when different events occur.

<!-- > #### comment::总线在系统设计中的好处
> 你应该可以体会到总线在系统设计中的好处之一:
> 通过划分模块并在模块之间进行通信, 降低整个系统的设计和维护的复杂度.
> 集中式控制器需要和每一个模块进行通信, 因此它的设计和维护是最困难的;
> 通过总线协议将全局通信分解到上下游模块之间, 就消除了集中式控制器,
> 从而降低了整个处理器的设计复杂度.
>
> 事实上, 计算机领域中的很多例子都是通过消息通信降低系统的复杂度,
> 例如操作系统中的微内核, 分布式系统中的MPI编程框架,
> 软件架构中的C/S模型(客户端-服务器模型), 甚至整个互联网都是通过网络包进行通信.
>
> 处理器设计的对象固然是硬件, 但设计模式并不仅仅是一个硬件问题,
> 我们还是可以从软件领域借鉴一些有用的经验帮助我们把处理器设计这件事做得更好. -->

> #### comment::Benefits of Buses in System Design
> You should be able to appreciate one of the benefits of buses in system design:
> By dividing modules and enabling communication between them, the overall complexity of system design and maintenance is reduced.
> A centralized controller needs to communicate with every module, making its design and maintenance the most challenging;
> By decomposing global communication into interactions between upstream and downstream modules through bus protocols, the need for a centralized controller is eliminated,
> thereby reducing the complexity of the entire processor design.
>
> In fact, many examples in the field of computing use message passing to reduce system complexity,
> such as microkernels in operating systems, MPI programming frameworks in distributed systems,
> client-server models in software architecture, and even the entire internet communicates through network packets.
>
> While processor design deals with hardware, design patterns are not solely a hardware issue,
> and we can still draw useful experiences from the software domain to help improve processor design.

<!-- 利用Chisel中的函数抽象和元编程功能, 我们可以将不同微结构处理器的设计模式统一起来,
并且很容易对处理器微结构进行"升级". -->

Using the function abstraction and meta-programming features in Chisel, we can unify the design patterns of processors with different microarchitecture and easily "upgrade" the microarchitecture of processors.

```scala
class NPC extends Module {
  val io = // ...

  val ifu = Module(new IFU)
  val idu = Module(new IDU)
  val exu = Module(new EXU)
  val wbu = Module(new WBU)

  StageConnect(ifu.io.out, idu.io.in)
  StageConnect(idu.io.out, exu.io.in)
  StageConnect(exu.io.out, wbu.io.in)
  // ...
}

object StageConnect {
  def apply[T <: Data](left: DecoupledIO[T], right: DecoupledIO[T]) = {
    val arch = "single"
    // To illustrate the concept of abstraction, some details have been omitted in this code.
    if      (arch == "single")   { right.bits := left.bits }
    else if (arch == "multi")    { right <> left }
    else if (arch == "pipeline") { right <> RegEnable(left, left.fire) }
    else if (arch == "ooo")      { right <> Queue(left, 16) }
  }
}
```

<!-- > #### option::重构NPC
> 尝试采用上面的总线思想, 重构NPC.
> 尽管这并不是强制性的, 但如果你使用Chisel开发, 我们强烈建议你进行重构,
> 这也是为接下来接入SoC, 以及将来实现流水线提前做好准备.
>
> 如果你使用Verilog开发, 你可能会感到重构工作有一些繁琐.
> 不过, 我们想强调的是, 设计模式和RTL实现是不同的层面,
> 尽管你可能会遇到一些困难, 但我们还是鼓励你思考如何通过Verilog实现上述正确的设计模式. -->

> #### option::NPC Refactoring
> Attempt to refactor the NPC using the bus concept mentioned above.
> Although this is not mandatory, if you are using Chisel for development, we strongly recommend refactoring your code.
> This will also prepare you for future integration with SoC and pipeline implementation.
>
> If you are developing in Verilog, you might find the refactoring work somewhat tedious.
> However, we want to emphasize that design patterns and RTL implementation are different layers.
> Despite potential challenges, we encourage you to consider how to achieve the correct design patterns through Verilog.

<!-- ## 系统总线 -->
## System bus

<!-- 除了上文介绍的处理器内各模块的连接之外, 处理器如何连接到存储器和设备也是至关重要的,
毕竟真实的处理器无法脱离存储器和外设进行工作.
连接处理器和存储器以及设备之间的总线通常称为系统总线.
下面我们以处理器和存储器之间的连接为例, 介绍系统总线应该如何设计. -->

Apart from the interconnection of various modules within the processor as mentioned earlier, how the processor connects to memory and devices is also crucial,
as real processors cannot operate without being connected to memory and peripherals.
The bus that connects the processor to memory and devices is typically referred to as the system bus.
Below, we will use the connection between the processor and memory as an example to explain how the system bus should be designed.

<!-- ### 访问只读存储器 -->
### Accessing Read-Only Memory

<!-- 由于从存储器中读出数据是最基本的需要, 我们首先考虑处理器如何通过系统总线完成读操作.
假设处理器规格固定为Nx32, 即存储器包含N个字, 每个字为32位.
同时假设该存储器的读延迟固定为1周期, 这实际上是一种同步存储器,
即从收到读请求到返回数据之间的延迟是固定的, SRAM的访问特性正是如此.
事实上, NPC仿真环境提供的`pmem_read()`没有读延迟, 收到读请求的当前周期就可以返回读数据,
但它只是用于方便我们实现单周期处理器, 实际上并不存在这样的存储器器件. -->

Due to the fundamental need to read data from memory, let's first consider how a processor completes a read operation through the system bus.
Assuming a processor specification of Nx32, where memory contains N words, each word being 32 bits.
Additionally, assuming that the memory's read latency is fixed at 1 cycle, which essentially represents synchronous memory,
where the delay between receiving a read request and returning data is constant, as seen in SRAM's access characteristics.
In reality, the `pmem_read()` provided by the NPC simulation environment has no read latency; it can return read data in the current cycle upon receiving a read request.
However, this is only used to facilitate the implementation of a single-cycle processor and does not reflect an actual memory device.

<!-- 如果不考虑写操作, 我们只需要一个只读存储器(ROM, Read-Only Memory)即可.
为了从ROM中读出数据, 相应的总线只需要两个信号, 分别为地址和数据, 二者的位宽分别为log2(N)和32. -->

If we do not consider write operations, a read-only memory (ROM) is enough.
To read data from ROM, the corresponding bus only requires two signals: address and data. The bit widths of these signals are log2(N) and 32, respectively.

```
+-----+ raddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
| CPU | <---        rdata[31:0] | MEM |
+-----+                         +-----+
```

<!-- 其通信协议为:
* master(CPU)向slave(MEM)发送读地址`raddr`
* 下个周期slave向master回复数据`rdata`
* 上述行为每周期都发生 -->

The communication protocol is as follows:
* The master (CPU) sends the read address `raddr` to the slave (MEM).
* In the next cycle, the slave responds to the master with the data `rdata`.
* The above actions occur every cycle.

<!-- > #### todo::评估单周期NPC的主频和程序性能
> 在进一步修改NPC之前, 尝试通过你在预学习阶段中使用的`yosys-sta`项目来评估当前NPC的主频.
> 不过在评估之前, 你需要进行以下工作:
> 1. 先运行microbench的train规模测试, 记录其运行结束所需的周期数
> 1. 在RTL中注释通过DPI-C调用`pmem_read()`和`pmem_write()`的代码,
>    然后为取指和访存各自实例化一个存储器.
>    为了保持单周期的特性, 我们需要实例化的存储器需要当前周期就能返回读数据,
>    因此我们可以像寄存器堆那样通过触发器实现它.
>    如果你使用Verilog, 可以直接实例化`RegisterFile`模块, 当然你需要把端口正确连上.
>    为了统一测试结果, 我们约定实例化的存储器大小为256x32b, 即1KB,
>    共实例化两个这样的存储器, 总大小为2KB.
>
> 我们之所以这样修改, 是因为单周期NPC要求每个周期都完成一条指令完整的生命周期,
> 因此无法连接任何现实中的存储器, 只能连带两个类似寄存器堆的存储器一同评估主频.
> 修改后, 你就可以评估单周期NPC的主频了.
>
> 根据评估的主频和刚才记录的microbench执行的周期数,
> 就可以估算出将来NPC运行microbench需要多久了.
> 注意这并非仿真的耗时, 而是假设NPC在上述主频下运行程序的时间.
> 例如, yzh某个版本的NPC在`yosys-sta`项目默认提供的nangate45工艺下主频为51.491MHz,
> 因此可以算出microbench需要运行3.870s, 但仿真花费了19.148s.
>
> 当然, 这个估算结果其实并不准确, 而且还可以说是非常乐观的:
> * 这个单周期NPC距离可流片的配置还差很远, 例如我们刚才修改存储器的时候, 其实把I/O相关的部分都忽略了
> * 上述主频是综合后的主频, 布局布线之后引入的线延迟会进一步把主频拉低
> * 取指单元对应的存储器因为没有写操作, 被yosys优化掉了
> * 访存单元对应的存储器其实也远远装不下microbench.
>   要成功把train规模的测试运行起来, 数据需要占用1MB内存.
>   这个大小都已经远远超过实际处理器芯片设计中可以容纳的触发器数量了,
>   先不考虑EDA工具的处理时间, 光是在芯片上摆满这么多触发器,
>   从占用面积来估算线延迟就已经大得不得了了.
>
> 所以, 这个评估结果的参考意义其实很小, 就当作是给后续的评估练练手吧. -->

> #### todo::Evaluate the Clock Frequency and Program Performance of Single-Cycle NPC
> Before further modifying the NPC, please try to evaluate the current NPC's clock frequency using the `yosys-sta` project you used in the pre-learning phase.
> However, before evaluation, you need to perform the following tasks:
> 1. Run the microbench test with the `train` scale first and record the number of cycles required for its completion.
> 1. Comment out the code that calls `pmem_read()` and `pmem_write()` through DPI-C in RTL,
>    then instantiate a memory device for instruction fetching and another for data access.
>    To maintain the single-cycle nature, the instantiated memory needs to return read data in the current cycle,
>    so we can implement it through flip-flops similar to the register file.
>    If you are using Verilog, you can directly instantiate a `RegisterFile` module, ensuring correct port connections.
>    For consistent testing results, we agree to instantiate memories of size 256x32b each, totaling 1KB.
>    Instantiate two such memories for a total size of 2KB.
>
> The reason for this modification is that a single-cycle NPC requires completing a full instruction lifecycle every cycle,
> making it impossible to connect to any real-world memory. Instead, two registerfile like memory devices are connected for frequency evaluation.
> After modification, you can evaluate the clock frequency of the single-cycle NPC.
>
> Based on the evaluated clock frequency and the previously recorded number of cycles for microbench execution,
> you can estimate how long it will take for the NPC to run microbench in the future.
> Note that this is not simulation time but an estimated program execution time at the mentioned clock frequency.
> For example, in a certain version of NPC in `yosys-sta` project with nangate45 technology, the clock frequency is 51.491MHz,
> indicating microbench would take 3.870s to run but simulation took 19.148s.
>
> However, this estimation is not accurate and can be considered very optimistic due to:
> * The single-cycle NPC is far from tape out; for instance, when modifying memory device earlier, I/O-related parts were ignored.
> * The mentioned clock frequency is post-synthesis; after layout and routing, net delays introduced will further reduce the clock frequency.
> * The memory corresponding to instruction fetching was optimized out by yosys due to lack of write operations.
> * The memory corresponding to data access cannot accommodate microbench as it requires 1MB of memory for successful execution at training scale.
>   This size far exceeds the number of flip-flops that can be accommodated in actual processor chip design.
>   Set EDA tool processing time aside, just filling up so many flip-flops on a chip would introduce significant area occupation affecting net delays significantly.
>
> Hence, the reference value of this evaluation result is minimal; consider it as practice for subsequent evaluations.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::将IFU访问的存储器改造成SRAM
> 1. 用RTL为IFU编写一个SRAM模块, 地址位宽为32bit, 数据位宽为32bit
> 1. 收到读请求后, SRAM模块通过DPI-C调用`pmem_read()`读出数据,
>    并延迟1周期返回读出的数据, 来实现一个更真实的存储器
>
> 不过由于这个SRAM需要经过1周期才能拿到读出的数据,
> 这时候NPC已经不是一个严格意义上的单周期处理器了, 而是一个简单的多周期处理器:
> 1. 在第1个周期, IFU发出取指请求
> 1. 在第2个周期, IFU拿到指令, 并交给后续的模块译码并执行
>
> 如果你按照前文的建议重构了NPC, 你会发现将NPC改造成多周期处理器并不难实现. -->

> #### todo::Transform the Memory Accessed by IFU into SRAM
> 1. Write an SRAM module in RTL for the Instruction Fetch Unit (IFU) with a 32-bit address width and a 32-bit data width.
> 1. Upon receiving a read request, the SRAM module will use DPI-C to call `pmem_read()` to read the data,
>    then delay returning the read data by 1 cycle to simulate a more realistic memory operation.
>
> However, since this SRAM requires 1 cycle to retrieve the read data,
> the NPC is no longer strictly a single-cycle processor but rather a simple multi-cycle processor:
> 1. In the first cycle, the IFU issues an instruction fetch request.
> 1. In the second cycle, the IFU receives the instruction and passes it to subsequent modules for decoding and execution.
>
> If you have refactored the NPC as suggested earlier, you will find that transforming the NPC into a multi-cycle processor is not difficult to achieve.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### option::让DiffTest适配多周期处理器
> 修改成多周期处理器后, NPC就并非每个周期都执行一条指令了.
> 为了让DiffTest机制可以正确工作, 你需要对检查的时机稍作调整.
> 为此, 你可能需要从仿真环境中读取RTL的一些状态,
> 来帮助你判断应该什么时候进行DiffTest的检查. -->

> #### option::Adapt DiffTest for Multi-Cycle Processor
> After modifying the NPC into a multi-cycle processor, the NPC no longer executes an instruction every cycle.
> To ensure the DiffTest functions correctly, you need to adjust the timing of checks.
> You may need to read some RTL states from the simulation environment
> to help determine when to perform DiffTest checks.

<!-- ### 访问可读可写存储器 -->
### Accessing Read-Write Memory

<!-- 如果要支持写操作, 就需要在总线中添加新的信号:
* 首先自然需要写地址`waddr`和写数据`wdata`
* 由于写操作并非每个周期都发生, 因此还需要添加写使能信号`wen`
  * 虽然读操作也并非每个周期都发生, 例如对于改成多周期处理器的NPC, 第2个周期并不需要取指,
    但由于读操作不会改变电路状态, 因此理论上读使能并非必须
  * 不过实际中一般还是有读使能`ren`, 如果没有读请求, 存储器就无需进行读操作, 从而节省能耗
* 写操作可能只写入一个字当中的若干字节(例如`sb`指令只写入1字节),
  因此还需要添加写掩码信号`wmask`, 用于指定写入数据中的哪些字节 -->

To support write operations, new signals need to be added to the bus:
* Firstly, it is necessary to include the write address `waddr` and write data `wdata`.
* Since write operations do not occur every cycle, an additional signal called write enable `wen` is required.
  * While read operations also do not occur every cycle (for example, in a multi-cycle processor like the modified NPC where the second cycle does not require instruction fetching), read enable `ren` is theoretically not essential as read operations do not alter circuit states.
  * However, in practice, a read enable `ren` signal is typically included. If there are no read requests, the memory does not need to perform read operations, thereby saving power.
* Write operations may only write into certain bytes within a word (for example, the `sb` instruction writes only 1 byte),
  hence the need for a write mask signal `wmask` to specify which bytes in the data should be written.

```
+-----+ raddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
|     | ren                ---> |     |
|     | <---        rdata[31:0] |     |
|     | waddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> |     |
| CPU | wdata[31:0]        ---> | MEM |
|     | wen                ---> |     |
|     | wmask[3:0]         ---> |     |
+-----+                         +-----+
```

<!-- 同时, 通信协议需要增加写操作行为的定义, 我们用伪代码来表示: -->
Additionally, the communication protocol needs to define write operation behavior. We represent this using pseudocode:
```c
if (wen) {
  // "wmask_full" represents the result of expanding "wmask" by bits.
  M[waddr] = (wdata & wmask_full) | M[waddr] & ~wmask_full;
}
```

<!-- > #### todo::将LSU(访存单元)访问的存储器改造成SRAM
> 1. 用RTL为LSU编写一个SRAM模块, 地址位宽为32bit, 数据位宽为32bit
> 1. 收到读写请求后, 通过DPI-C调用`pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`,
>    并延迟1周期返回读出的数据
>    * 此时可以保留`pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`中的设备访问功能,
>       我们将在后续讲义中介绍如何通过总线访问外设
>
> 实现后, 对于`load`指令, NPC需要3个周期才能完成:
> 1. 在第1个周期, IFU发出取指请求
> 1. 在第2个周期, IFU拿到指令, 并交给后续的模块译码,
>    发现是`load`指令后, 则通过LSU发出访存请求
> 1. 在第3个周期, LSU拿到数据, 并交给WBU写回寄存器 -->

> #### todo::Transform the Memory Accessed by LSU (Load-Store Unit) into SRAM
> 1. Write an SRAM module in RTL for the LSU with a 32-bit address width and a 32-bit data width.
> 1. Upon receiving read and write requests, use DPI-C to call `pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`
>    and delay returning the read data by 1 cycle.
>    * The device access functionality within `pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()` can be retained at this stage.
>       We will discuss how to access peripherals through the bus in upcoming texts.
>
> After implementation, for a `load` instruction, the NPC will require 3 cycles to complete:
> 1. In the first cycle, the IFU issues an instruction fetch request.
> 1. In the second cycle, the IFU receives the instruction and passes it to subsequent modules for decoding.
>    Upon identifying a `load` instruction, it sends a memory access request through the LSU.
> 1. In the third cycle, the LSU retrieves the data and hands it over to the WBU for register writeback.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### comment::同时读写同一个地址 - RTFM
> 如果同时读写同一个地址, 存储器究竟读出哪个数据呢?
> 事实上, 具体的行为需要RTFM: 器件的手册规定了该操作的行为, 在部分器件中, 读结果是未定义的.
> SRAM和FPGA中的Block RAM大都是这种特性.
>
> 因此, master端尽量不要同时读写同一个地址.
> 如果实在无法避免, 可以在master端加入检测逻辑, 在检测到读写同相同地址时,
> 可以延迟写操作, 先读出旧数据; 或者延迟读操作, 先写入数据, 再读出写入后的新数据.
> 这样, 至少可以保证读结果是有定义的.
>
> 不过, 当前NPC的IFU只会发出读请求, 而LSU则不会同时发出读请求和写请求
> (取决于正在执行的是`load`指令还是`store`指令), 因此当前你无需在NPC中考虑这个问题. -->

> #### comment::Simultaneous Read and Write to the Same Address - RTFM (Read The Friendly Manual)
> When simultaneous read and write operations occur on the same address, which data will the memory actually return?
> The specific behavior in such cases needs to be referred to the manual: the device's manual specifies the behavior of this operation, and in some devices, the read result is undefined.
> This is a common characteristic in SRAMs and Block RAMs found in FPGAs.
>
> Therefore, it is better for the master side to avoid simultaneous read and write operations to the same address.
> If unavoidable, detection logic can be implemented on the master side. When detecting simultaneous read and write to the same address,
> options include delaying the write operation to first read the old data or delaying the read operation to first write the data before reading the newly written data.
> This approach ensures that the read result is well-defined.
>
> However, in the current NPC design, the IFU only issues read requests, and the LSU does not simultaneously issue read and write requests
> (depending on whether a `load` or `store` instruction is being executed). Therefore, you do not need to consider this issue within the NPC at this stage.

<!-- ### 更普遍的存储器 -->
### More General Memory Device

<!-- 事实上, 读延迟为1周期的特性通常只有SRAM能够满足,
因为它能够使用与处理器制造相同的工艺进行生产, 但SRAM的价格十分昂贵.
为了实现更低成本的存储器, 通常会采用其他存储密度更大的工艺来制造存储器, 例如DRAM.
但由于电气特性, 这些存储器的读延迟通常大于处理器的1周期. -->

In reality, the characteristic of a 1-cycle read latency is typically only achievable with SRAM,
because it can be produced using the same process as the processor. However SRAM is very expensive.
To achieve lower-cost memory, other technologies with higher storage density like DRAM are often used.
However, due to electrical characteristics, the read latency of these memories is typically greater than 1 cycle of the processor.

<!-- 这时处理器不能一直发送读请求, 否则由于处理器的请求速率大于存储器的服务速率,
导致存储器会一直被无用的请求占据, 严重降低整个系统的工作效率.
为了解决这个问题, master需要告诉slave何时发送有效的请求, 同时也需要识别slave何时能接收请求.
这可以通过之前介绍的握手实现: 只要在master和slave之间的读协议添加一对握手信号即可,
也即, 添加`rvalid`指示处理器发送的读请求`raddr`有效, 添加`rready`指示存储器可以接收读请求.
这里的`rvalid`实际上也充当了读使能`ren`的作用. -->

In this scenario, the processor cannot continuously send read requests because the processor's request rate exceeds the memory's service rate.
This situation leads to the memory device being occupied by useless requests, significantly reducing the efficiency of the entire system.
To address this issue, the master needs to inform the slave when to send valid requests and also identify when the slave can receive requests.
This can be achieved through a handshake mechanism: by adding a pair of handshake signals in the read protocol between the master and slave.
Specifically, adding `rvalid` indicates that the read request `raddr` sent by the processor is valid, and adding `rready` indicates that the memory device can receive read requests.
Here, `rvalid` effectively acts as a read enable signal `ren`.

```
+-----+ raddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
|     | rvalid             ---> |     |
|     | <---             rready |     |
|     | <---        rdata[31:0] |     |
| CPU | waddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> | MEM |
|     | wdata[31:0]        ---> |     |
|     | wen                ---> |     |
|     | wmask[3:0]         ---> |     |
+-----+                         +-----+
```

<!-- 事实上, 存储器何时完成读操作也是无法提前得知的,
例如DRAM会周期性地对存储单元的电容进行充电刷新, 如果此时收到读请求, 将会在充电刷新结束之后才会真正读出数据.
另一方面, 处理器也可能因为上一次读出的数据还没用完, 而没有准备好接收存储器返回的数据.
这些问题也都需要通过握手信号来解决: 添加`rvalid`信号表示存储器已经读出有效的数据,
添加`rready`信号表示处理器可以接收存储器返回的数据.
不过这两个信号和上文读请求的握手信号重名了,
为了区分, 我们为读地址相关的握手信号添加前缀`a`表示地址, 即`arvalid`和`arready`. -->

In fact, when memory completes a read operation is also unpredictable in advance.
For example, DRAM periodically refreshes the capacitors of memory cells. If a read request is received during a refresh cycle, the data will only be read out after the refresh cycle is completed.
On the other hand, the processor may not be ready to receive data from memory because the previously read data has not been fully utilized.
These issues also need to be addressed through handshake signals: adding `rvalid` signal indicates that the memory has read valid data,
and adding `rready` signal indicates that the processor is ready to receive data from memory.
However, these two signals have the same names as the handshake signals for read requests mentioned earlier.
To distinguish, we add the prefix `a` to the handshake signals related to read addresses, resulting in `arvalid` and `arready`.

```
+-----+ araddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
|     | arvalid             ---> |     |
|     | <---             arready |     |
|     | <---         rdata[31:0] |     |
|     | <---              rvalid |     |
| CPU | rready              ---> | MEM |
|     | waddr[log2(N)-1:0]  ---> |     |
|     | wdata[31:0]         ---> |     |
|     | wen                 ---> |     |
|     | wmask[3:0]          ---> |     |
+-----+                          +-----+
```

<!-- 因此, 在一次读事务的完成过程中, master和slave都需要经历两次握手:
master先等`arready`, 确保slave接收读地址后, 再等`rvalid`接收读数据;
而slave则先等`arvalid`接收读地址, 再等`rready`, 确保master接收读数据.
当然, 在RTL实现层面, 这些都是状态机. -->

Therefore, in the completion process of a read transaction, both the master and slave need to go through two handshakes:
The master first waits for `arready` to ensure the slave has received the read address, then waits for `rvalid` to receive the read data.
The slave, on the other hand, first waits for `arvalid` to receive the read address, then waits for `rready` to ensure the master receives the read data.
Of course, at the RTL implementation level, these are all state machines.

<!-- 同样地, 写事务也需要握手, 因此需要添加`wvalid`和`wready`信号: -->
Similarly, write transactions also require handshakes, thus necessitating the addition of `wvalid` and `wready` signals:

```
+-----+ araddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
|     | arvalid             ---> |     |
|     | <---             arready |     |
|     | <---         rdata[31:0] |     |
|     | <---              rvalid |     |
| CPU | rready              ---> | MEM |
|     | waddr[log2(N)-1:0]  ---> |     |
|     | wdata[31:0]         ---> |     |
|     | wmask[3:0]          ---> |     |
|     | wvalid              ---> |     |
+-----+ <---              wready +-----+
```

<!-- > #### info::握手信号的微结构设计意义 - 解耦
> 从微结构设计来看, 握手信号最重要的意义就是屏蔽通信双方的处理延迟.
> 例如, DRAM何时读出数据受很多因素的影响, 包括刷新时机, DRAM控制器的请求调度,
> DRAM颗粒中的row buffer是否命中, 甚至颗粒的电气特性等.
> 而CPU何时发送请求并接收数据, 同样也受很多因素的影响,
> 包括程序何时执行访存指令, 流水线的堵塞情况, 缓存的状态等.
> 如果通信的时候其中一方要考虑另一方的这些情况, 这样的设计是不可能实现的:
> 我们没有办法知道另一方处于什么状态.
>
> 握手信号成功地把双方的状态解耦开来,
> 有了握手信号之后, 双方都无需关心对方模块的状态, 只需要等待握手即可.
> 因此, 只要模块遵循同一套总线协议, 接入总线后就可以顺利工作. -->

> #### info::The Significance of Microarchitectural Design in Handshake Signals - Decoupling
> From the Microarchitectural point of view, the most important significance of the handshake signal is to shield the processing delay between the two communicating devices.
> For example, the timing of when data is read from DRAM is influenced by many factors, including refresh timing, DRAM controller request scheduling, whether the row buffer in the DRAM chip is hit, and even the electrical characteristics of the chip.
> Similarly, when the CPU sends requests and receives data, it is also influenced by various factors such as when the program executes memory access instructions, pipeline congestion, and cache status.
>
> If one device has to consider these factors of the other device during communication, such a design would be impossible to achieve because we cannot know the state of the other device.
>
> Successfully decoupling the states of both devices through handshake signals allows both devices to not worry about the state of the other module and simply wait for the handshake.
> Therefore, as long as modules adhere to the same bus protocol, they can smoothly operate after connecting to the bus.

<!-- ### 错误处理和异常 -->
### Error handling and exceptions

<!-- 在部分情况下, 存储器处理读写事务的时候可能会发生错误,
例如读写地址超过了存储区间的范围, 或者通过校验码发现读写的存储单元发生损坏.
在这些情况下, slave通常应该告诉master发生了错误, 让master决定如何处理.
因此, 我们需要在存储器返回读出数据时额外传输一个`rresp`信号,
来指示读操作是否成功, 若不成功, 读数据`rdata`是无效的.
同理, 存储器在处理写操作后也需要返回一个写回复信号`bresp`(这里的`b`表示`backward`),
当然, 这个信号也需要握手. -->

In certain scenarios, errors can occur when memory device processes read and write operations.
For example, reading or writing addresses beyond the storage range, or detecting damaged memory cells through checksums.
In such cases, the slave typically should inform the master of the error and let the master decide how to proceed.
Therefore, when returning read data from memory, an additional `rresp` signal is transmitted to indicate whether the read operation was successful.
If unsuccessful, the read data `rdata` is considered invalid.
Similarly, after processing a write operation, the memory also needs to send back a write response signal `bresp` (where `b` stands for `backward`).
Of course, this signal also requires a handshake.

```
+-----+ araddr[log2(N)-1:0] ---> +-----+
|     | arvalid             ---> |     |
|     | <---             arready |     |
|     | <---         rdata[31:0] |     |
|     | <---          rresp[1:0] |     |
|     | <---              rvalid |     |
|     | rready              ---> |     |
| CPU | waddr[log2(N)-1:0]  ---> | MEM |
|     | wdata[31:0]         ---> |     |
|     | wmask[3:0]          ---> |     |
|     | wvalid              ---> |     |
|     | <---              wready |     |
|     | <---          bresp[1:0] |     |
|     | <---              bvalid |     |
+-----+ bready              ---> +-----+
```

<!-- 在处理器中, 如果读写操作出错, 可以进一步抛出异常, 通知软件进行处理.
例如, RISC-V设置了3种`Access Fault`异常, 分别代表在存储器中取指令, 读数据, 写数据时出错.
这样, 存储器内部的错误就可以通过总线协议传递到处理器,
再通过处理器的异常处理机制告知软件了. -->

In a processor, if there are errors in read or write operations, exceptions can be further thrown to notify the software for handling.
For example, RISC-V has defined 3 types of `Access Fault` exceptions, representing errors when fetching instructions from memory, reading data, and writing data.
In this way, errors within the memory can be communicated to the processor through bus protocols and then notified to the software via the processor's exception handling mechanism.

<!-- ## 业界中广泛使用的总线 - AXI协议家族 -->
## Bus protocol widely used in the industry - the AXI protocol family.

<!-- 我们对上文的总线协议稍作变换:
1. 将写地址和写数据分开, 写地址采用`aw`前缀, 写数据采用`w`前缀
1. 将`wmask`改名为`wstrb`, 并将信号按功能分成5组 -->

We make a slight modification to the bus protocol mentioned above:
1. Separate the write address and write data, using the `aw` prefix for write address and the `w` prefix for write data.
1. Rename `wmask` to `wstrb`, and categorize the signals into 5 groups based on their functions.

```
araddr  --->               araddr  --->              araddr  ---> -+
arvalid --->               arvalid --->              arvalid --->  AR
<--- arready               <--- arready              <--- arready -+
<--- rdata                 <--- rdata
<--- rresp                 <--- rresp                <--- rdata   -+
<--- rvalid                <--- rvalid               <--- rresp    |
rready  --->       1       rready  --->      2       <--- rvalid   R
waddr   --->      ===>     awaddr  --->     ===>     rready  ---> -+
wdata   --->               awvalid ---> *
wmask   --->               <--- awready *            awaddr  ---> -+
wvalid  --->               wdata   --->              awvalid --->  AW
<--- wready                wmask   --->              <--- awready -+
<--- bresp                 wvalid  --->
<--- bvalid                <--- wready               wdata   ---> -+
bready  --->               <--- bresp                wstrb   --->  |
                           <--- bvalid               wvalid  --->  W
                           bready  --->              <--- wready  -+

                                                     <--- bresp   -+
                                                     <--- bvalid   B
                                                     bready  ---> -+
```

<!-- 这样我们就得到了AMBA AXI手册中的的AXI4-Lite总线规范了!
AXI4-Lite有5个事务通道, 分别是读地址(AR), 读数据(R), 写地址(AW), 写数据(W)和写回复(B),
它们的工作状态只取决与各自的握手信号, 因此它们可以独立工作,
例如读请求和写请求可以在同一个周期中同时发送. -->

This gives us the specification of the AXI4-Lite bus protocol from the AMBA AXI manual!
AXI4-Lite consists of 5 transaction channels: Read Address (AR), Read Data (R), Write Address (AW), Write Data (W), and Write Response (B).
Their operational states are solely determined by their respective handshake signals, allowing them to work independently.
For example, read requests and write requests can be sent simultaneously in the same cycle.

<!-- 在实际使用中, 我们还需要避免和握手信号相关的两种情况:
1. master和slave互相都在等待对方先将握手信号置1:
   master在等slave将`ready`置1后, 才将`valid`置1;
   而slave则在等master将`valid`置1后, 才将`ready`置1.
   结果就是双方无限制地等待, 造成[死锁(dead lock)][deadlock].
1. master和slave都在试探性地握手, 但试探失败后又都取消握手:
   * 在第1周期, master将`valid`置1, 但此时`ready`置0, 握手失败
   * 在第2周期, slave发现上一个周期master将`valid`置1, 因此这个周期将`ready`置1;
     但因为上一个周期握手失败, master在这个周期将`valid`置0, 于是这个周期握手仍然失败
   * 在第3周期, master发现上一个周期slave将`ready`置1, 因此这个周期将`valid`置1;
     但因为上一个周期握手失败, slave在这个周期将`ready`置0, 于是这个周期握手仍然失败
   * 结果双方仍然无限制地等待, 造成[活锁(live lock)][livelock]. -->

In practical usage, we also need to avoid two scenarios related to handshake signals:
1. Both master and slave are waiting for each other to set the handshake signal to 1:
   * The master waits for the slave to set `ready` to 1 before setting `valid` to 1.
   * The slave waits for the master to set `valid` to 1 before setting `ready` to 1.
   * This results in an endless waiting loop, causing a [deadlock][deadlock].
1. Both master and slave are tentatively engaging in handshaking, but when they fail, they cancel the handshake
   * In the first cycle, the master sets `valid` to 1, but `ready` is 0, leading to a failed handshake.
   * In the second cycle, the slave observes that the master set `valid` to 1 in the previous cycle and sets `ready` to 1 in this cycle.
     However, as the previous handshake failed, the master sets `valid` back to 0 in this cycle, resulting in another failed handshake.
   * In the third cycle, the master notices that the slave set `ready` to 1 in the previous cycle and sets `valid` to 1 in this cycle.
     But due to the previous failed handshake, the slave sets `ready` back to 0 in this cycle, leading to another failed handshake.
   * This continuous back-and-forth results in both sides endlessly waiting, causing a [livelock][livelock].

[deadlock]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock
[livelock]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock#Livelock

```
        +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+
 clk    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
        +   +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+
        +-------+       +-------+
valid           |       |       |
                +-------+       +--------
                +-------+       +--------
ready           |       |       |
        +-------+       +-------+
```

<!-- > #### todo::避免握手的死锁和活锁
> 为了避免上述问题, AXI标准规范对握手信号的行为添加了一些约束.
> 你需要RTFM找到这些约束, 并正确理解它们.
>
> 注意你务必要查阅官方手册, 如果你参考了一些来源不够正规的资料,
> 你将会在接入SoC的时候陷入痛苦的调试黑洞. -->

> #### todo::Avoiding Deadlock and Livelock in Handshaking
> To avoid the above problems, the AXI specification added some constraints on the behavior of handshake signals.
> You need to RTFM (Read The Friendly Manual) to find these constraints and understand them correctly.
>
> Please note that you must consult the official manual. If you rely on sources that are not sufficiently formal,
> you will find yourself in a painful debugging black hole when integrating into the SoC.

<!-- ### 让NPC支持AXI4-Lite -->
### Let NPC support AXI4-Lite

<!-- 至此, 你已经知道了AXI4-Lite总线中的每一个信号因何加入, 并从需求角度理解了该总线规范的设计思想.
现在就可以把AXI4-Lite加入到NPC中, 让NPC通过AXI4-Lite来访问存储器了. -->

By now, you have understood why each signal is included in the AXI4-Lite bus protocol and grasped the design philosophy of this bus specification from a demand perspective.
Now, you can integrate AXI4-Lite into NPC, and let NPC to access memory through AXI4-Lite.

<!-- > #### todo::将IFU和LSU的访存接口改造成AXI4-Lite
> 1. 将IFU和LSU的访存接口改造成AXI4-Lite
> 1. 将IFU和LSU访问的SRAM模块用AXI4-Lite进行封装, 但内部还是通过DPI-C来读写数据
>
> 由于IFU只会对存储器进行读操作, 不会写入存储器,
> 因此可以将IFU的`AW`, `W`和`B`三个通道的握手信号均置为0.
> 当然, 更好的做法是在握手信号的另一端通过`assert()`确保它们一直为0.
> 此外, 虽然目前SRAM模块的访问延迟还是固定的1周期,
> 但你需要在master和slave两端都正确地用握手来实现AXI4-Lite总线协议. -->

> #### todo::Convert the memory access interfaces of IFU and LSU to AXI4-Lite
> 1. Transform the memory access interfaces of IFU and LSU into AXI4-Lite.
> 1. Wrap the SRAM modules accessed by IFU and LSU with AXI4-Lite, while internally using DPI-C for data read/write operations.
>
> Since IFU only performs read operations on memory and does not write to memory,
> the handshake signals for the `AW`, `W`, and `B` channels of IFU can all be set to 0.
> However, a better practice is to ensure they remain 0 at the other end of the handshake signals using `assert()`.
> Additionally, even though the access latency of the SRAM module is currently fixed at 1 cycle,
> you need to correctly implement the AXI4-Lite bus protocol using handshakes on both the master and slave ends.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### caution::思考后消化的知识才是你真正掌握的
> 传统课本上对总线介绍通常只停留在协议层次, 并没有明确介绍如何从RTL层次实现总线,
> 因此如果大家只阅读课本, 总线仍然是一个相对抽象的概念.
> "一生一芯"是一个侧重动手实践的学习项目, 我们在讲义中已经给大家介绍了如何在RTL层次实现总线了.
>
> 不过, 如果你发现在实现的过程中还是存在一些难以克服的困难,
> 那就要给自己敲响警钟了: 你很可能缺乏将需求一步步转换为代码的能力.
> 你很可能需要反思你过去的学习方式, 例如:
> * 是否过分依赖框图, 导致你缺乏微结构设计能力, 在没有框图的情况下感觉无从下手
> * 更糟糕地, 是否过分依赖那些充满示例代码的资料和书籍,
>   导致你不仅缺乏微结构设计能力, 也缺乏将设计转换为代码的能力.
>   <font color=red>我们强烈不推荐初学者在自己的第一版代码能工作之前阅读这类资料和书籍!</font>
>
> 我们希望你可以把"独立思考"放在学习的首位, 而不是当代码的搬运工.
> 如果你发现从现在开始独立思考是一件很困难的事情,
> 很有可能是因为你在之前的学习中错过了太多, 使得你没有能力独自完成接下来的任务了.
> 如果真是这样, 我们建议你带着正确的心态重新开始学习"一生一芯". -->

> #### caution::Knowledge Gained through Reflection is True Mastery
> Traditional textbooks often introduce buses at the protocol level without explicitly detailing how to implement a bus at the RTL level.
> Therefore, if one solely relies on textbooks, buses remain a relatively abstract concept.
> "OSOC" is a hands-on learning project that has already introduced how to implement buses at the RTL level in our course materials.
>
> However, if you find that there are still some difficulties that are hard to overcome during the implementation process,
> it's time to be alarmed: you may lack the ability to progressively translate requirements into code.
> You may need to reflect on your past learning methods, such as:
> * Are you overly reliant on diagrams, leading to a lack of microarchitecture design skills and feeling lost without diagrams?
> * Even worse, are you overly dependent on materials and books filled with example code?
>   Resulting in not only a lack of microarchitecture design skills but also an inability to convert designs into code.
>   <font color=red>We strongly discourage beginners from reading such materials and books until their first version of code is functional!</font>
>
> We hope that you prioritize "independent thinking" in your learning journey rather than just being a code transporter.
> If you find independent thinking challenging from this point onwards,
> it's likely because you missed out on crucial aspects during your previous learning, leaving you unequipped to tackle upcoming tasks alone.
> If this is the case, we recommend restarting your learning journey with the right mindset through "OSOC".

<!-- 事实上, 我们现在实现的AXI4-Lite只是AXI的简化版,
完整的AXI总线规范有更多的信号和特性, 如果大家感兴趣, 也可以通过RTFM了解相关细节.
我们会在后续讲义中逐渐介绍更多我们需要使用的特性. -->

In fact, the AXI4-Lite we are currently implementing is just a simplified version of AXI. 
The complete AXI bus specification includes more signals and features. If you are interested, you can refer to the official manual to learn more about the details.
We will gradually introduce more features that we need to use in the upcoming course materials.

<!-- > #### caution::端正心态, 在迭代开发和调试中逐渐理解所有细节
> 不过, 作为一个业界中广泛使用的总线协议, AXI的细节还是不少,
> 导致大部分初学者其实很难在首次接触AXI的时候就可以理解得十分透彻.
> 因此, 大家也需要端正心态, "一次把总线代码全部写完, 以后就不用改"的想法是不现实的.
>
> 事实上, 所有人都是在迭代开发和调试中逐渐理解总线的所有细节.
> 资深工程师学习新知识的时候尚且如此, 初学者想一步登天的想法并不符合学习的客观规律. -->

> #### caution::Maintain the Right Mindset, Gradually Grasp All Details through Iterative Development and Debugging
> However, as a widely used bus protocol in the industry, AXI has many details,
> making it challenging for most beginners to fully understand it upon initial exposure.
> Therefore, it is essential to maintain the right mindset. The idea of "writing all bus code at once and never needing to change it again" is unrealistic.
>
> In reality, everyone gradually comprehends all the details of a bus through iterative development and debugging.
> Even senior engineers go through this process when learning new concepts. The notion of wanting to master everything instantly does not align with the objective laws of learning.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::Testing the Bus Implementation
> 在SRAM模块中添加随机延迟的功能, 来测试总线实现是否能在任意延迟下正确工作.
> 当然, 你可以按照从简单到复杂的顺序添加访存延迟:
> 1. 将SRAM的访问延迟依次修改成5, 10, 20等
> 1. 在SRAM模块中添加一个LFSR, 通过它来决定当前请求的延迟
> 1. 在IFU和LSU中也添加LFSR, 通过它来决定`AR`/`AW`/`W`通道中`valid`信号的延迟,
>    以及`R`/`B`通道中`ready`信号的延迟
>
> 如果NPC在充满LFSR的随机延迟下仍然能正确启动RT-Thread, 就能大大增强你对代码的信心. -->

> #### todo::测试总线的实现
> Implement random delays in the SRAM module to test whether the bus implementation works correctly with arbitrary delays.
> Of course, you can gradually add memory access delays in a simple-to-complex order:
> 1. Modify the access delays of SRAM sequentially to 5, 10, 20, etc.
> 1. Add an LSFR in the SRAM module to determine the delay for the current request.
> 1. Add LSFR in IFU and LSU to determine the delay of the `valid` signal in the `AR`/`AW`/`W` channels and the delay of the `ready` signal in the `R`/`B` channels.
>
> If the NPC can boot RT-Thread correctly despite random delays filled with LFSRs, it gives you a big boost of confidence in your code.

<!-- ### 总线的仲裁 -->
### Arbiter in Bus

<!-- 经过上述改动, 我们实例化了两个SRAM模块.
但在真实的硬件中, 这两个SRAM模块应该都对应到同一个存储器,
这一点目前是通过`pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`访问仿真环境中唯一的存储器来实现的.
但在真实的硬件中不存在`pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`这样的仿真环境功能,
因此需要考虑如何在硬件实现上让IFU和LSU访问同一个存储器. -->

After the modifications mentioned above, we have instantiated two SRAM modules.
However, in real hardware, these two SRAM modules should map to the same memory.
Currently, this is achieved by accessing the unique memory in the simulation environment using `pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()`.
In real hardware, functions like `pmem_read()`/`pmem_write()` do not exist.
Therefore, it is necessary to consider how to enable IFU and LSU to access the same memory in the hardware implementation.

<!-- 这其实是一个多master的问题, 既然slave同时只能接收一个请求, 那就通过一个仲裁器(Arbiter)来决策:
当多个master同时访问同一个slave时, 获得访问权的master将得到放行, 可以成功访问slave;
其他master的请求将阻塞在仲裁器, 等待获得访问权的master访问结束后, 它们才能获得接下来的访问权. -->

This is actually a multi-master problem. Since a slave can only handle one request at a time, an arbiter is used to make decisions:
When multiple masters simultaneously access the same slave, the master that obtains access rights will be granted permission to successfully access the slave.
The requests from other masters will be blocked at the arbiter, waiting for the master with access rights to finish its access before they can gain access next.

<!-- 简单整理一下, 仲裁器需要实现如下功能:
1. 调度: 选择一个正在发送有效请求的master
1. 阻塞: 阻塞其他master的访问
1. 转发: 将获得访问权的master的请求转发给slave, 并在slave的请求到达时, 将其转发给之前的master -->

To summarize, the arbiter needs to implement the following functions:
1. Scheduling: Selecting a master that is currently sending a valid request.
1. Blocking: Blocking access from other masters.
1. Forwarding: Forwarding the request from the master that has obtained access rights to the slave, and upon receiving the response from the slave, forwarding it back to the respective master.

<!-- 多个master同时访问时具体如何选择, 其实是一个调度策略的问题.
在复杂系统中, 调度策略还需要考虑更多问题:
首先要避免饥饿, 即任一个master都能在有限次仲裁后获得访问权;
其次还要避免死锁, 即仲裁器造成的阻塞不应使整个系统出现循环等待的现象.
不过目前NPC是一个多周期处理器, IFU和LSU的master不会同时发送请求,
因此你也不必考虑复杂的调度策略, 选择任意简单的调度策略即可. -->

When multiple masters are accessing simultaneously, the specific selection process is essentially a scheduling strategy issue.
In complex systems, scheduling strategies need to consider more factors:
firstly, avoiding starvation, ensuring that each master can eventually gain access rights after a finite number of arbitrations;
secondly, preventing deadlock, where the blocking caused by the arbiter should not lead to a situation of circular waiting in the entire system.
However, since NPC is a multi-cycle processor and IFU and LSU masters do not send requests simultaneously,
you do not need to consider complex scheduling strategies. Choosing any simple scheduling strategy will suffice.

<!-- > #### todo::实现AXI4-Lite仲裁器
> 保留一个AXI4-Lite的SRAM模块, 编写一个AXI4-Lite仲裁器, 从IFU和LSU中选择一个master与SRAM模块通信.
>
> Hint: 仲裁器本质上也是一个状态机, 而阻塞和转发的功能本质上是通过操作握手信号来实现的. -->

> #### todo::Implement an AXI4-Lite Arbiter
> Keep one AXI4-Lite SRAM module and develop an AXI4-Lite arbiter to select a master from IFU and LSU to communicate with the SRAM module.
>
> Hint: The arbiter is essentially a state machine, and the blocking and forwarding functionalities are fundamentally achieved through manipulating handshake signals.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::评估NPC的主频和程序性能
> 实现了AXI4-Lite之后, NPC就可以外接实际的SRAM了,
> 我们将要评估的对象是带有一个AXI4-Lite接口的NPC, 其中包含刚才实现的AXI4-Lite仲裁器,
> 而通过DPI-C实现的AXI4-Lite接口的SRAM模块则不在评估范围内.
>
> 按照同样的评估方式, yzh另一个版本的NPC在`yosys-sta`项目默认提供的nangate45工艺下主频为297.711MHz,
> 因此可以算出microbench需要运行1.394s, 但仿真花费了29.861s.
> 可以看到仿真时间增加了, 这是因为多周期NPC的IPC小于单周期NPC, 需要花费更多的周期数来执行程序.
> 虽然IPC下降了, 但因为主频大幅提升, 因此程序反而执行得更快了.
>
> 别忘了, 上面的单周期NPC评估结果是非常乐观的, 甚至是乐观到实际中不可行的程度.
> 但这个多周期NPC的评估结果就真实多了, 至少1MB SRAM是可以实现的.
> 不过这还是和我们将要流片的配置差别很大, 毕竟1MB SRAM的流片成本仍然很高.
> 接下来我们会接入SoC, 使得评估结果更接近流片场景. -->

> #### todo::Evaluate NPC Clock Frequency and Program Performance
> With the implementation of AXI4-Lite, NPC can now be connected to actual SRAM.
> The evaluation will focus on an NPC with an AXI4-Lite interface, including the recently implemented AXI4-Lite arbiter.
> The AXI4-Lite interface SRAM module implemented through DPI-C is not within the scope of this evaluation.
>
> Following the same evaluation method, another version of the NPC has a clock frequency of 297.711MHz on the nangate45 process provided by default by the `yosys-sta` project.
> This calculates to microbench needing 1.394s to run, but simulation takes 29.861s.
> The increase in simulation time is due to the multi-cycle NPC having a lower IPC than the single-cycle NPC, requiring more cycles to execute programs.
> Although IPC decreases, the significant increase in clock frequency results in faster program execution.
>
> It's important to remember that the evaluation results for the single-cycle NPC mentioned above are overly optimistic, possibly to an impractical extent.
> However, the evaluation results for this multi-cycle NPC are more realistic, at least that implementing a 1MB SRAM is possible.
> Nonetheless, there is still a significant difference from our upcoming tape out, as the cost of fabricating a 1MB SRAM remains high.
> Next steps involve integrating into SoC to make the evaluation results more representative of chip fabrication scenarios.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### caution::为什么要先实现总线?
> 过去有很多同学都对这个问题感到十分困惑, 甚至有同学认为这是讲义给大家挖的坑,
> 最大的原因是他们认为将来实现流水线的时候所有代码都需要推翻重写.
> 另一种声音是, 如果先写单周期, 后面也是要推翻重写.
>
> 之所以会让这些同学觉得后面需要推翻重写, 一方面有来自传统课本的原因:
> 传统课本确实把处理器的设计原理介绍得很清楚, 但却几乎不会考虑如何在不同微结构的处理器之间平滑过渡的问题,
> 毕竟这属于工程实践的范畴, 传统课本并不会将它作为一个知识点来讲解.
> 所以, 另一方面的原因就是这部分同学过分依赖传统课本:
> 他们仅仅按照课本上的内容去实现, 没有思考过如何采用合适的设计模式实现上述过渡.
>
> 对于初学者来说, 这其实不算一个大问题, 毕竟设计模式需要在充分了解各种细节之后才能进行抽象总结,
> 我们不应该要求初学者第一次学习就能思考出一个很好的设计模式.
> <font color=red>但如果你想学得更多, 就不应该把课本上的内容看作是处理器设计的全部,
> 不应该把推翻重写看作是浪费时间.</font>
> 作为还没有深入思考的初学者, 推翻重写的背后其实蕴含着极大的成长机会:
> 为什么前后两版设计的差别这么大? 能不能从中抽象总结出一些共性特征?
> 如果要重新来做这件事, 怎么样才能做得更好?
>
> 事实上, 好的经验和创新的机会都是从问题中总结出来的, 大家将来走向工作岗位,
> 肯定还会遇到更多不同的问题, 这些问题都不再像教科书那样有标准答案.
> 课本中的知识是有限的, 仅仅靠课本, 我们能成长的高度也是有限的,
> 但能够进一步帮助我们解决将来未知问题的是我们的思维习惯:
> 你在多次思考的过程中所形成的思维习惯, 要比课本中的知识重要得多.
>
> 回到处理器设计模式这个问题, 我们在2017年5月就已经思考并总结出相关经验,
> 并且在2017年和2018年南京大学参加的两届龙芯杯比赛,
> 以及2019年中国科学院大学发起的第一期"一生一芯"计划中都实践过, 并没有造成过多的推翻重写.
> 不少同学并不了解其中的情况, 因此也还是会根据自己的经验来下判断.
>
> 具体地, 通过使用Chisel的合适特性,
> 从单周期修改成多周期, 只需要改动30行代码, 占800行总代码的3.75%;
> 从多周期改成不带转发功能的流水线, 只需要改动50行代码, 占1000行总代码的5.00%;
> 为流水线添加转发功能, 只需要改动20行代码, 占1100行总代码的1.82%.
> 即使你使用Verilog开发, 如果使用正确的设计模式, 改动代码的占比也应该大致相同.
> 从比例上来看, 还远远不到需要推翻重写的程度.
>
> 我们想说的是, 作为初学者, 你需要保持一颗好奇的心, 以及"绝知此事要躬行"的理念.
> 当别人跟你说这样你需要推翻重写时, 你不应该仅仅听从这些"忠告",
> <font color=green>而是应该思考为什么, 并通过自己的实践去钻研, 去回答这个问题</font>.
> 因为在学习当中, 你才是主角. -->

> #### caution::Why Implement the Bus First?
> Many students have been puzzled by this question in the past, with some even believing it to be a trap set by the course material.
> The primary reason for their confusion stems from the notion that all code will need to be rewritten when transitioning to implementing pipeline.
> Another perspective suggests that starting with a single-cycle design will also lead to a complete rewrite later on.
>
> The concern about the need for rewriting arises partly from traditional textbooks, which focus on explaining processor design principles clearly but often overlook the smooth transition between different microarchitectures. This aspect falls more into the realm of engineering practice, which traditional textbooks do not typically emphasize as a standalone topic. Additionally, some students overly rely on traditional textbooks and implement solutions without considering appropriate design patterns for such transitions.
>
> For beginners, this is not a significant issue as understanding design patterns requires a deep understanding of various details before abstracting them.
> We should not expect beginners to come up with excellent design patterns right from the start.
> <font color=red>However, if you aim to delve deeper into the subject matter, you should not view textbook content as the entirety of processor design or consider rewriting as a waste of time.</font>
> Embracing the opportunity to rewrite actually presents significant growth potential for beginners.
> It prompts questions like: Why are there such significant differences between the two versions? Can common characteristics be abstracted from these differences?
> How can we do things better if we were to start over?
>
> Valuable experiences and innovative ideas are often stem from addressing challenges.
> As individuals progress into work roles, they will encounter diverse problems that lack standard textbook solutions.
> Knowledge from textbooks is limited; relying solely on them restricts our growth potential.
> What truly aids in solving future unknown problems is our thinking habits - the mental frameworks developed through repeated contemplation hold more significance than textbook knowledge.
>
> Reflecting on processor design patterns, we have been contemplating and summarizing related experiences since May 2017.
> These insights were put into practice during the Longxin Cup competitions at Nanjing University in 2017 and 2018,
> as well as in the inaugural "OSOC" program initiated by the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019, without causing excessive rewrites.
> Many students may not be aware of these circumstances and may make judgments based on their own experiences.
>
> Specifically, leveraging appropriate features of Chisel allows for relatively minor code adjustments:
> transitioning from single-cycle to multi-cycle designs, only 30 lines of code need to be changed (3.75% of 800 lines of code);
> transitioning from multi-cycle to pipeline without forwarding, only 50 lines of code need to be changed (5.00% of 1000 lines of code);
> adding forwarding functionality to the pipeline, only 20 lines of code need to be changed (1.82% of 1100 lines of code).
> Even if developing in Verilog, with correct design patterns, the proportion of code changes should be roughly similar.
> From a proportional standpoint, it is far from necessitating complete rewrites.
>
> We want to say: as a beginner, maintain a curious mindset and embrace the principle of "learning by doing."
> When others suggest that you need to rewrite your work, do not blindly follow such advice;
> <font color=green>instead, ponder why and delve into answering this question through your own practical exploration</font>.
> In learning, you are indeed the protagonist.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### caution::所以为什么要先实现总线?
> 这是为了践行"先完成, 后完美"的设计法则.
>
> 如果我们把单周期处理器作为起点, 那流水线就应该属于"后完美"的部分.
> 因此, 我们先实现总线, 其实是先将处理器往可流片的方向靠拢, 实现"先完成",
> 即去掉任何一个功能, 要么处理器不能运行RT-Thread, 要么存储器和外设与可流片设计差别很大.
>
> 在"先完成"的基础上, 我们再通过量化评估方法理解每一种优化措施带来的性能收益.
> 这也是希望初学者将来可以量化地理解流水线设计对系统带来的性能提升,
> 而不仅仅是像传统课本那样, 将流水线设计作为一个将框图翻译成RTL代码的作业. -->

> #### caution::So Why Implement the Bus First?
> This is to practice the design principle of "complete first, perfect later."
>
> By taking a single-cycle processor as the starting point, the pipeline should be considered part of the "perfect later" phase.
> Therefore, implementing the bus first is a step towards aligning the processor towards being able to tape out, achieving the "complete first" aspect.
> Removing any functionality would either render the processor unable to run RT-Thread or result in significant differences between memory, peripherals, and a synthesizable design
>
> Building on the "complete first" foundation, we can then use quantitative evaluation methods to understand the performance benefits brought by each optimization measure.
> This approach aims to enable beginners to quantitatively comprehend how pipeline design enhances system performance,
> moving beyond traditional textbooks that often treat pipeline design as a task of translating block diagrams into RTL code.

<!-- ### 多个设备的系统 -->
### Multi-device system

<!-- 到目前为止, 我们的系统中还只有存储器.
显然, 真实的计算机系统中并不仅仅只有存储器, 还有其他设备.
因此我们需要考虑, 如何让NPC访问其他设备. -->

So far, our system only has memory.
Obviously, a real computer system consists of more than just memory; it also includes other devices.
Therefore, we need to consider how to allow NPCs to access other devices.

<!-- 之前学习设备的时候, 我们介绍过内存映射I/O, 这种机制通过不同的内存地址来指示CPU访问的设备.
我们之前在仿真环境中通过`pmem_read()`和`pmem_write()`,
按照访存地址来选择需要访问的设备, 从而实现内存映射I/O的功能.
但真实的硬件并不存在`pmem_read()`和`pmem_write()`这两个仿真环境的函数. -->

When we previously studied devices, we introduced memory-mapped I/O, a mechanism that uses different memory addresses to indicate the devices accessed by the CPU.
In our simulation environment, we used `pmem_read()` and `pmem_write()`
to select the device to access based on the memory address, thus implementing memory-mapped I/O functionality.
However, real hardware does not have the `pmem_read()` and `pmem_write()` functions found in the simulation environment.

<!-- 实际上, 硬件是通过crossbar（有时也写作Xbar）模块来实现内存映射I/O.
Xbar是一个总线的多路开关模块, 可以根据输入端的总线请求的地址,
将请求转发到不同的输出端, 从而传递给不同的下游模块.
这些下游模块可能是设备, 也可能是另一个Xbar.
例如, 下图中的Arbiter用于从IFU和LSU中选择一个请求转发给下游,
下游的Xbar收到请求后, 根据请求中的地址将其转发给下游设备. -->

In reality, hardware implements memory-mapped I/O through a crossbar module (sometimes written as Xbar).
The Xbar is a multiplexer switch module for buses that can forward requests from input buses to different output buses based on the requested address, thereby passing them to different downstream modules.
These downstream modules could be devices or another Xbar.
For example, in the diagram below, the Arbiter is used to select a request from IFU and LSU and forward it downstream.
The downstream Xbar then forwards the request to the downstream device based on the address in the request.

```
+-----+      +---------+      +------+      +-----+
| IFU | ---> |         |      |      | ---> | UART|  [0x1000_0000, 0x1000_0fff)
+-----+      |         |      |      |      +-----+
             | Arbiter | ---> | Xbar |
+-----+      |         |      |      |      +-----+
| LSU | ---> |         |      |      | ---> | SRAM|  [0x8000_0000, 0x80ff_ffff)
+-----+      +---------+      +------+      +-----+
```

<!-- 如果请求的地址位于串口设备UART的地址空间范围, 那么Xbar会将请求转发给UART;
如果请求的地址位于SRAM的地址空间范围, 则将请求转发给SRAM.
如果Xbar发现请求的地址不属于任何一个下游的地址空间, 例如`0x0400_0000`,
就会通过AXI4-Lite的resp信号返回一个错误`decerr`, 表示地址译码错.
这里的“地址译码”表示将请求的地址转换为下游总线通道的编号,
而Xbar中的地址译码器可以看作是内存映射I/O在硬件实现中的核心模块. -->

If the requested address falls within the address space range of the UART serial device, the Xbar will forward the request to the UART.
If the requested address falls within the address space range of SRAM, then the request will be forwarded to SRAM.
If the Xbar finds that the requested address does not belong to any downstream address space, for example `0x0400_0000`, it will return an error `decerr` via the AXI4-Lite `resp` signal, indicating a decoding error.
Here, "address decoding" refers to translating the requested address into the ID of the downstream bus channel,
and the address decoder in Xbar can be seen as a core module in hardware implementation of memory-mapped I/O.

<!-- Arbiter和Xbar也可以合并成一个多进多出的Xbar, 视场合也称为Interconnect或总线桥.
例如, 下图即为一个2输入2输出的Xbar. 它可以连接多个master和多个slave,
首先通过Arbiter记录当前请求来自哪个master, 再依据该请求的地址决定将其转发给哪个slave. -->

Arbiter and Xbar can also be combined into a multi-input multi-output Xbar, sometimes referred to as an Interconnect or bus bridge depending on the context.
For example, the diagram below shows a 2-input 2-output Xbar. It can connect multiple masters and multiple slaves,
first using an Arbiter to determine which master the current request is from, and then based on that request's address deciding which slave to forward it to.

```
+-----+      +------+      +-----+
| IFU | ---> |      | ---> | UART|  [0x1000_0000, 0x1000_0fff)
+-----+      |      |      +-----+
             | Xbar |
+-----+      |      |      +-----+
| LSU | ---> |      | ---> | SRAM|  [0x8000_0000, 0x80ff_ffff)
+-----+      +------+      +-----+
```

<!-- > #### comment::物理内存属性(PMA)和裸机程序开发
> 上面的拓扑连接方式关系也可能会引起一些特殊的问题.
> 由于IFU可以通过Xbar和UART相连, 说明CPU也可以从UART中取指,
> 但显然UART设备不能存放程序和指令.
>
> 因此, 如果程序错误地跳转到`0x1000_0000`, CPU将向UART发送读请求,
> UART依据设备的行为返回一个数据, 它可能表示UART的内部状态的编码, 或者是UART接收到的字符.
> 一方面, CPU会错误地将UART返回的结果当作指令来执行, 从而造成严重的错误;
> 另一方面, IFU对UART设备的访问可能会改变设备的状态, 导致UART进入不可预测的状态.
>
> 为了避免引发这种问题, 一般会在硬件中添加一些检查机制,
> 为每段地址空间添加若干权限属性, 如可读标志, 可写标志, 可执行标志等
> 在IFU发出取指请求前, 先检查请求的地址所属的地址空间是否可执行,
> 若不可执行, 则直接抛出异常.
> 在RISC-V中, 如果系统中设备的地址空间是固定的,
> 则可以通过PMA(Physical Memory Attribute)机制来实现权限检查;
> 而对于地址空间在操作系统初始化时动态分配的现代PCI-e设备,
> 则可以通过PMP(Physical Memory Protection)机制或虚拟内存机制来实现权限检查.
> 如果你对这两种机制感兴趣, 可以参考RISC-V手册中的相关内容.
>
> 当然, 如果CPU中没有实现这些检查机制, 在开发裸机程序的时候就要特别小心了:
> 如果裸机程序跑飞了, 后果可能是难以想象的. -->

> #### comment::Physical Memory Attributes (PMA) and Bare Metal Programming
> The above topology connection method may also cause some special issues.
> Since the IFU can be connected to the Xbar and UART, it means the CPU can fetch instructions from the UART,
> but obviously, the UART device cannot store programs and instructions.
>
> Therefore, if the program mistakenly jumps to `0x1000_0000`, the CPU will send a read request to the UART,
> and the UART will return a data based on the device's behavior, which may represent the encoding of the UART's internal state or a character received by the UART.
> On one hand, the CPU may mistakenly execute the result returned by UART as an instruction, leading to serious errors;
> on the other hand, IFU's access to the UART device may change the device's state, causing the UART to enter an unpredictable state.
>
> To avoid triggering such problems, generally some check mechanisms are added in hardware,
> adding several permission attributes for each address space, such as readable flag, writable flag, executable flag, etc.
> Before IFU issues an instruction fetch request, it first checks if the address of the request belongs to an executable address space,
> if not executable, it throws an exception directly.
> In RISC-V, if the address space of devices in the system is fixed,
> permission checks can be implemented through the PMA (Physical Memory Attribute) mechanism;
> while for modern PCI-e devices with dynamically allocated address spaces during operating system initialization,
> permission checks can be implemented through PMP (Physical Memory Protection) mechanism or virtual memory mechanism.
> If you are interested in these two mechanisms, you can refer to relevant content in the RISC-V manual.
>
> Of course, if these check mechanisms are not implemented in the CPU, one must be extremely careful when developing bare metal programs:
> if a bare metal program goes astray, the consequences could be unimaginable.

<!-- 有了Xbar后, 我们就可以把之前在仿真环境中实现的外设功能移动到RTL中了. -->
With Xbar in place, we can now move the peripheral functions previously implemented in the simulation environment to RTL.

<!-- > #### todo::实现AXI4-Lite接口的UART功能
> 编写一个AXI4-Lite接口的slave模块, 其中包含一个设备寄存器.
> 当往这个设备寄存器发送写请求时, 则将写入数据的低8位作为字符, 通过`$write()`或`printf()`输出.
> 为了方便测试, 这个设备寄存器的地址可以设置成与之前仿真环境中串口的地址相同.
> 实现后, 你还需要自己编写一个Xbar模块, 来将这个具备UART功能的模块接入系统中.
>
> 事实上, 我们并没有完整地用RTL来实现一个UART,
> 因为`$write()`或`printf()`仍然需要依赖仿真环境来实现字符的输出.
> 但作为一个总线的练习, 这已经足够了, 毕竟UART的实现还需要考虑很多电气细节.
> 不过我们很快就会接入SoC, 其中包含一个真实的UART控制器.
> 现在通过这个练习来测试总线的实现, 将来接入SoC的时候也会更顺利. -->

> #### todo::Implementing UART Functionality with AXI4-Lite Interface
> Write a slave module with an AXI4-Lite interface, containing a device register.
> When a write request is sent to this device register, the lower 8 bits of the written data will be treated as a character and output using `$write()` or `printf()`.
> For ease of testing, the address of this device register can be set to be the same as the address used for the UART in the previous simulation environment.
> Once implemented, you will also need to write an Xbar module to integrate this UART-capable module into the system.
>
> In reality, we have not fully implemented a UART using RTL,
> as `$write()` or `printf()` still rely on the simulation environment for character output.
> However, as an exercise in bus implementation, this is sufficient, considering that UART implementation involves many electrical details.
> Soon, we will integrate into an SoC that includes a real UART controller.
> By testing bus implementation through this exercise now, integration into the SoC in the future will also be smoother.

<!-- -->
<!-- > #### todo::实现AXI4-Lite接口的CLINT
> [CLINT(Core Local INTerrupt controller)][clint]是RISC-V系统中较通用的中断控制器,
> 是一个用于维护时钟中断和软件中断的模块.
> 不过目前我们的系统还不需要中断功能, 因此我们先考虑时钟相关的功能即可.
>
> 你需要实现一个AXI4-Lite接口的CLINT模块, 并将其接入系统.
> CLINT包含一个只读的设备寄存器`mtime`, 它会以一定的速率增长, 最简单的实现是每周期加1.
> 同样地, 为了方便测试, 其地址可以设置成与之前仿真环境中时钟的地址相同.
>
> 不过, `mtime`的流逝还不能直接反映时间的流逝, 它们之间相差一个系数, 需要由软件读出后进行处理.
> 在真实的处理器芯片中, 一般这个系数等于CLINT模块中的时钟频率, 从而可以让软件测量出真实的时间.
> 不过仿真环境中没有主频的概念, 如果这个系数等于仿真速率,
> 我们就可以在仿真环境中通过`mtime`的流逝计算出真实时间的流逝.
> 具体地, 你还需要修改IOE的相关代码, 让`AM_TIMER_UPTIME`返回的时间接近真实时间.
>
> 最后, 你还需要考虑`mtime`寄存器的位宽.
> 上述手册中定义的`mtime`是64位的, 这是为了避免在实际使用中发生溢出.
> 但目前NPC是32位的, 如果我们只读出`mtime`的低32位,
> 在一段时间之后, `mtime`将会发生溢出, 从而使系统的时间功能发生错误.
> 尽管你不太容易在仿真环境中运行到`mtime`溢出的时刻,
> 但如果NPC将来运行在500MHz的频率下, 将大概率会发生溢出.
> 因此, 运行在32位NPC上的软件需要依次读出`mtime`的低32位和高32位,
> 将其组合成一个64位的值, 供上层应用使用. -->

> #### todo::Implementing CLINT with AXI4-Lite Interface
> [CLINT(Core Local INTerrupt controller)][clint]is a commonly used interrupt controller in RISC-V systems, responsible for managing clock interrupts and software interrupts.
> However, since our system currently does not require interrupt functionality, we will focus on clock-related functions for now.
>
> You are required to implement a CLINT module with an AXI4-Lite interface and integrate it into the system.
> CLINT includes a read-only device register `mtime`, which increments at a certain rate, with the simplest implementation being an increment by 1 per cycle.
> Similarly, for testing convenience, its address can be set to be the same as the address used for the clock in the previous simulation environment.
>
> However, the progression of `mtime` does not directly reflect the passage of time; there is a coefficient difference that needs to be processed by software after being read out.
> In real processor chips, this coefficient is generally equal to the clock frequency in the CLINT module, allowing software to measure real time.
> In the simulation environment where there is no concept of a base frequency, if this coefficient equals the simulation rate,
> we can calculate real-time progression based on the progression of `mtime` in the simulation environment.
> Specifically, you will also need to modify the relevant IOE code to make `AM_TIMER_UPTIME` return time close to real time.
>
> Lastly, you need to consider the bit width of the `mtime` register.
> The `mtime` defined in the manual mentioned above is 64 bits to avoid overflow during actual usage.
> However, currently NPC is 32 bits; if we only read out the lower 32 bits of `mtime`,
> after some time, `mtime` will overflow, causing errors in the system's time functionality.
> Although it may not be easy to reach the point of overflow of `mtime` in the simulation environment,
> if NPC runs at a frequency of 500MHz in the future, overflow is highly likely to occur.
> Therefore, software running on a 32-bit NPC needs to sequentially read out the lower 32 bits and upper 32 bits of `mtime`,
> combine them into a 64-bit value for use by higher-level applications.

[clint]: https://chromitem-soc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/clint.html
